 Okay, now let's have a look at these other concerns, the non-euro, the non-financial. So here we see some examples of these non-monetary concerns. For instance, for the public sector, why is a governmental entity deciding to build a bridge or a tunnel? Not to make profit, but they do it to speed up traffic flows, to reduce congestion, to improve safety. They invest in water resources, to have more drinking water, to meet irrigation needs, to improve wastewater treatment, to make parts of the city more interesting for industrial development. So these are the public sector examples. Now you see the examples of the private sector. We will cover some of them. So what are the issues there? The issues are there like environmental concern, occupational safety, automation, innovation, image, competitiveness. Okay, so let me draw your attention to this. If you look in the book, in your handbook, you will see not a very extensive coverage of what we are seeing here in the remainder of this chapter. But of course, for the exam, I expect you to know what we've been seeing in class. I do not expect you to limit yourself to what is in the book. Okay, so cost effectiveness. What is effectiveness? Costs we already know. What are effectiveness? Well, effectiveness has to do with some results, with outputs of a project that we are doing. So these benefits are non-monetary, but in this case, they're still quantitative. For instance, percentage of risk reduction, percentage of throughput increase, response time, amount of pollution removed, number of occupational accidents avoided. Of course, they need to be relevant and we need to have them quantitative and objective and also practical. Maybe you can come up with a very nice quantitative measure, but if we can't measure it or it would require a lot of extra work to measure that, we will not use it because it's impractical. So the basic idea, and this is a conceptual figure here, is we have effectiveness and we have costs and we have different projects that are the dots. And how do we use the cost effectiveness analysis? Well, we can use it in two ways. Either we have a threshold, E, and we are saying, well, we are only interested in projects that are above a certain effectiveness level. They could say, well, I'm only interested in safety improving projects if they improve safety by more than 10% or if they can at least have the number of occupational accidents. So we can look at it in that way. Or we could say we have different projects, but we have a budget limitation. So we can only consider projects that are total cost us more than that amount. So that's the idea. So for a given budget, we want to maximize the effectiveness or for a given effectiveness level that we want to reach, we want to minimize the cost. Also in healthcare, by the way, this is a cost effectiveness is used. Costs or costs outcomes here are in natural units like, for instance, live years gained or points blood pressure or the level of blood glucose. And here also we have a cost effectiveness ratio, which is the cost of an intervention over the effectiveness of the intervention and an incremental cost effectiveness ratio, which is the incremental one, in fact, so B minus A for cost and B minus A for effectiveness. If you remember, we saw the tornado diagram in the chapter on risk showing this incremental cost effective ratio. Cost effectiveness plain is also popular there in healthcare. In healthcare, I mean, suppose that we have a treatment, a current treatment for a disease. And then we have some that's our defender and we have some challenges. So a new treatment, then we are looking where the new treatment is situated and we have an effectiveness axis and we have a cost axis. If the new treatment is here, it means that it's costing more and is less effective than the old one. So we definitely will not go for it. If it's here, we will do it because it's more effective and it's costing less. If it's in this race, in this area, we will have to see it's more effective, more costly or less costly and less effective. We will have to see what is the more important one, the difference in cost or the difference in effectiveness. OK, cost effectiveness analysis for multiple projects. We can make a difference between independent projects or mutually exclusive alternatives. Well, let's have a look. This is procedure for independent alternatives. As usual, let's go to an example that's more clear than explaining this text. This is an example for independent projects. The case study is about Rollings Foundation for Innovative Thinking. They allocate one million in grants to award companies that enroll their R&D personnel in a professional training program. As they are keen on rewarding top R&D, they want to use the number of patents approved each year by the companies as an effectiveness measure. Six companies asked for grants and submitted a program proposal. So in this table, the proposals are numbered from one to six. For each proposal, the proposed number of attendees is given as well the cost per person. And the last column provides a historical track record of the program graduates. As mentioned, this is what the Rollings Foundation is very interested in. OK, let's have a look at the solution. So what happened here in the table is that the cost effectiveness ratio per patent was computed. Of course, not so difficult. We have the costs and we have the patents per graduate, so we can compute the cost effectiveness ratio. And then a ranking was made. Then the total cost of the program was computed, which is simple, which is the cost per person times the number of people that intend to be included in the program. And we can start. So we have 60,000 for the first program. We have 217,500 if we also include the second program. If you want to include the third program, which here is program five. Actually, we have 283. We still have some space, so we can include the next one. And then we have 739. We still have some money left. But then if you want to include the full program six, we see that we have a problem because we only have one million available. So we will not be able to completely include that sixth one. So OK, so that's how it works. Not very complicated. Mutual exclusive alternatives. Let's have a look there as well. Again, you have the procedure. I think that the example will make a lot clear. The example is about one of the corporations, which was not selected for external funding, and they decided to fund 50 of their R&D people to attend the innovation and creativity programs at their own expense. Important criterion is that the program must have a historical average for a graduate of at least two patterns per year. And we are asked to use the data in the table to select the best program. So these are the programs with more than two patterns a year, cost per person. The 50 people that they attend and then we can compute the cost effectiveness ratio, which is three column three divided by column four and six is a program cost, which is two times three, as we have seen in the previous example. Now, what is the procedure? Well, we will rank the alternatives by increasing effectiveness, which is the patterns number of patterns per year. And then we compare the cost effectiveness ratio for program four, which is a challenger to do nothing, the defender. But we see that the program cost per person divided by the patterns per graduate is 1190. So it seems interesting. So let's do program four. Now program four becomes the defender program five, the challenger. If you do incremental analysis, we come to the conclusion that we have again a positive number. So it means that five is more expensive, but we also get more patterns. So it's not very clear. There's no clear dominance. So we keep for the time being, we keep both programs. Then we compare five to program two. We see that we have a negative cost effectiveness. So that means that we have a cheaper increment. We have more patterns and we spend less money. So we will eliminate program five. Then we have two and four lifts. So we compare two and four. Again, we have a positive number. So there's no dominance, which means that in this case, our cost effectiveness analysis does not provide us with a clear answer. So we will have to look further, maybe include some other non-financial criteria.