 Let's have a look at some cost estimation techniques. What we see here is also in the handbook. The simplest method for cost estimation probably is the per unit method. You see the formula there. We have a unit cost factor and a number of units. For instance, the cost of a house construction per liveable square foot is 150 dollars per square foot. The cost per parking space in a parking garage. The cost of construction is standard with suburban street per mile. So we have very rough calculations based on a unit cost. It's good for a first feasibility check, for instance. Well, simple examples. By the way, all the upcoming examples are pretty simple and straightforward. So here we have a manufacturing process for sections of high pressure gas pipes. And we know that a 20 percent estimate is acceptable. So that means that we don't have to go into very detailed cost estimation. So the unit cost is probably good enough. And then you see, well, what we need. We need materials, we need machinery tooling, we need labor for casting, for finishing, for some indirect labor, for the provision, for instance. We see the amount that we need in tons in hours. We see the unit cost per ton or per hour. And then we just have to multiply, of course, the amount in times the U, the cost, and then we make the sum. So it's a very simple, very rough method for making an estimate. So these are the cost indices or maybe the best known way of estimating costs, as they also appear in our daily life with the example of the consumer price index. So this is a cost index. It's a dimensionless number. It's the ratio of the cost of something today to its cost sometime in the past. So besides our daily life example, there are a lot of industrial examples like the CE or the Plant Cost Index for Chemical Engineering or the Marshall and Swift Index for Equipment. This is an example for the Consumption Price Index for Belgium. You can look it up if you want. You have the website where you can find the information. This is an example from the US. I give it here because these systems are carefully monitored and if necessary, they are adjusted. So then the new system for the consumer price index is described carefully so that everybody knows exactly what is in it and what is not. This is an example from some cost indices taken from the book. We have the Chemical Engineering Plant Index. We have here our Consumer Price Index, the Crude Oil Index and then Pumps, Compressors and Equipment Index. We will see some more later like here. We have here Chemical Engineering, Engineering Cost and the Marshall and Swift. We see that it's rather simple. We have the cost at time t is a cost at time c0 multiplied by the ratio i t over i 0. The example seems to be a little bit outdated but the principle remains the same. So here is a simple example. In evaluating the feasibility of a major construction project, an engineer is interested in estimating the cost of skilled labor for the job. The engineer finds that a project of similar complexity and magnitude was completed five years ago at a skilled labor cost of 360,000. The ENR, the Engineering News Record Skilled Labor Index was 3,496 then and now it's 4,038. So what is it today in terms of an estimation for the skilled labor cost? Well, if we use that equation, we see that we have making the simple calculation, we have our new estimate. This is another example. So a manufacturing engineer with Hughes Industries is in the process of estimating costs for plant expansion. Two important elements used in the manufacturing process are circuit boards and platinum alloy. What the purchasing department did was they did spot checks of the market prices of these two elements and they summarized things in the table you see below. And then the question is, if you make the first quarter of 2001 the base period, what are then the cost indices for the other periods? So if you have a look here at what is in the red frame, it's easy. So we take Q1 being the base, so that means that for Q3 of the previous year, we get 56.7 divided by the 56.6 of our base quarter that gives us 100.17 and similar way we do all the rest. Why are these indices important or why are they interesting? It helps us to see variability, it helps us to see trends, it helps us to see how the market is behaving. So it's providing us some management information. A note, maybe first, which is not on the slide, but it's important to note that these indices are published, so you don't have to compute them yourself. They are published like the Chemical Engineering Index or the Marshall and Swift Index or the Engineering News Record Index that are published. They are built up out of components. These components can have subcomponents and each of these subcomponents and components have different weights that are taken into account. Also every index has a base here that's not the same for all indices. This is an example of the Chemical Engineering Index and the little table or list on the right gives you an impression what is in it. We have an Equipment Index, we have a Construction Labor Index, we have a Buildings Index and we have an Engineering and Supervision Index. If you see that or the components, there are subcomponents. If you see for the Equipment Index, we have heat exchanges, we have process machinery, pipes, valves and fittings, process instruments, pumps and compressors, electrical equipment, structural support and miscellaneous. So we have equipment that is actually used a lot in chemical engineering plants. Well to the right you see some more details, you see also the weights and what you see in the graph is how it's evolving over time. It's not monotonically evolving, the curves are increasing, everything gets more expensive. It means that there are ups and downs like for instance if there's an economic crisis or if there's a lot of inflation and things like that, it can influence that curve. You also see that the different curves are not evolving in the same way. So that's also something that is important to note. Evolution, so there were some revisions, so every now and then it's needed to revise the index and that's what the Chemical Engineering Index is doing. Its origin is in 1963, so it's already quite an old index. It remained the same till 1982. In 2002 there was a last major revision, so if you see every 20 years we can think that one might be coming up soon. This is a nice, I would definitely tell you to read it. It's a quite interesting story. It's saying observing the five years rule, so I would suggest stop the recording and read it. What is it about? It's about, so we know that in 1970 a liquid oxygen plant of 700 tons a day had an initial cost of 10 million. Now we want to know in 2000, 30 years later, what a liquid oxygen plant of the same capacity would cost. So we can apply our cost index formula and then we find that it would be 31.3 million. So is that okay? Well, we applied the cost index formula correctly, so okay. But it's not okay. There is a need for critical reflection. We can't just extrapolate that index so far. In 30 years a lot can happen, like here the liquid oxygen plant, there were a lot of changes in production process, production efficiency went up, so technological changes. Also, occupational health and safety legislation changed, requiring modifications to the equipment, requiring extra monitoring equipment, requiring extra personnel. Also equipment and labor rates, two components that are important in that cost index, evolved at different rates, so we need a different weighting. So we could say that the cost index that we use is not reliable anymore. So we should be careful with extended time extrapolations. For some sectors that might be okay, but for others it's definitely not okay. So be careful. That's why they say the five-year rules, don't use them more than five years ahead. A little bit of information on that engineering cost index. There's an engineering use record construction cost index and engineering use record building cost index. Both are containing construction costs, but there's a difference in labor costs. The CCI is more for projects where labor costs are very important, why the building costs is more suited for building projects with a lot of structures in it. And here you see some information. So the base here is already very old index. They are working with spot prices from a single source. It needs to be a published source. They're looking at 20 cities. They make an average, so not a weighted average, an unweighted average. There is no Arizona or Florida city in it. There's no seasonal adjustment. So it's an index. I mean, don't expect these index to be 100% accurate and taking into account all different factors and influences that you want or expect. So be careful if you use an index. They're very handy, but be careful that you know what exactly is in it and what's not. This is a study. So it's a bit outdated, but it's still an interesting problem situation. So a chemical company in Belgium wanted to use an index, but they were not very keen on using an index from literature. And here you see these indices. They were brought to the same base here to compare them. And what they noticed was that there was a large difference between these indices. They weren't too confident that it was a good idea to use either of them. So they wanted to use one themselves and they wanted to have a quick one. So they simplified the cost index formula and they did some simulations so that they ended up with three factors and three weighting factors. Now it's, well, I say the chemical company in Belgium, but actually it was a multinational and they tried to apply this formula to different countries and they came out with different curves, very different results. So they said, well, if you have to use that in computations in Belgium, we will have to see where our materials come from, where the equipment coming from. So they made it a weighted sum of country index indices based on where their material was coming from. So it's giving you some idea on how these spaces are built. Now why did they want so a quick index? Well, they were using for their maintenance, they were using the formula total maintenance cost per year over capital replacement value or the stores ratio, MRO stands for maintenance, repair and operating supply over capital replacement value. The capital replacement value is defined as the money needed today to replace a current installation. They didn't want to go through a very sophisticated detailed engineering calculation to determine that capital replacement. They just wanted to use a index. So that's why they wanted that index that was really tailored to their specific situation. They switched from the old index that they were using to the new cost index. You see that the trend is fairly similar, but you also see that the numbers are not the same. So you might be surprised at the evolution of the numbers if you do not know that another index has been used. So again, be careful with the use of these indices. Here they used it for the stores ratio. Okay, but let's move on. These are some other examples. For instance, for material handling equipment manufacturing. This is one from the ICRI Institute for medical equipment. Okay, this is something we will do in the exercises now. What benefits do you see? What challenges do you see by using cost indices? If you recall in the first open office, this type of question was raised as being a typical another typical type of case study that you could come across in the exam. Now cost estimation relationships, also called CERs or parametric methods. They use design variables to predict costs. So they're different from cost index methods because the index is based on cost history of a well-defined quantity and quality of a variable. There are two types. We have the cost capacity equation and the factor methods. Let's have a look. So cost capacity equations are the most widely used ones. They're also called power laws or sizing models. And the formula is simple, as you see. So C2, the cost of at capacity Q2, we estimate that by taking the cost of capacity at Q2 Q1. And then we divide that. We multiply by Q2 over Q1 raised to a certain power. Now that certain power, where do we find it? Well, we find that it's published. For instance, in chemical engineering's handbook, the US Environmental Protection Agency handbooks, professional journals, etc. An average X is 0.6. If you have an X smaller than 1, we have economies of scale. If X is 1, we have a linear relationship. If X is larger than 1, we have these economies of scale. Of course, we could complement this by having our cost indices also in the picture. So here you see some examples. Maybe to the right you see that indeed if we have C1 of 1000, Q1 of 1000, and then Q2 of 2000. And what is C2? If X is 1, well, we have C2 is 2000, so it's linear. If X is smaller than 1, we have our economies of scale. If it's larger, we have these economies of scale. Now here you see some examples of components and you see the size range. And then you see the exponent X that you are supposed to use. So here a simple example. So we're talking about a digester. We know that for one capable of handling a flow rate of 0.5 million gallons per day, the cost was 1.7 million in 2000. And now we are asked to estimate the cost for a flow rate of 2.0 million of gallons per day. The exponent we have to use is in the range 0.2 to 40. So it's 0.14 in previous table. And the cost indices that we have to use or the cost index rather in 2000 is 131. And it has been updated for this year to 125. So in blue, we have our cost estimation based on the capacity. We're talking about the same piece of equipment, but they have a different capacity. So this is the first part. And then the second part with dotted lines is then the cost index that we are applying. So we can combine both. Another CER method is the factor method. It was developed originally for estimating total plant cost. The thing is that the total plant cost will be estimated based on major equipment items used in that plant. And then we multiply with factors. So we assume that the major costs or the cost of major equipment is already available. And then we can use the proper factors to have a rapid estimate. These factors are called the Leng factors because the first to use these factors was Leng. See, also not very recent. There have been updates in the method. Basic formula is CT, the total plant cost is based on CE, which is the cost of major equipment in that plant, times H and H is a factor, cost factor, which is a sum of individual cost factors. For instance, an engineer once has learned that the expansion of a solid fluid process plant is expected to have a delivered equipment cost of 1.5 million. If the overall cost factor for this type of plant is 3.63, then estimate the total plant cost. And that's not a very difficult equation, of course. Now, these factors, well, Leng showed that direct cost factors and indirect cost factors can be combined into one overall factor. And we know what they are for some types of plants, 3.1, for instance, for a solid process plant or 4.74 for fluid process plants. So that's what you see on top. So we have H is 1 plus all these factors, and these factors include direct and indirect costs. That method has been refined. And that's the second equation that you see. There we have, again, the 1 plus the sum of all if i's, but these if i's are direct cost components. And then we multiply that by 1 plus if big i, and that big i is the indirect cost factor. So it's a slightly different approach. The delivered equipment cost for a small chemical process plant is expected to be 2 million if the direct cost factor is 1.61. And the indirect cost factor is 0.25, determine the total cost for the plant. And we will just add up all the cost factors. So H is 1 plus the direct one and the indirect one. We multiply the 2 million with that and we end up with 5,720,000. Let's have a look at another example. So we're talking about an activated sludge wastewater treatment plant. And we have estimates for the delivered equipment first costs. And we also know that the cost factor for installation of piping, concrete, steel, insulation, supports, etc. is 0.49. The construction factor is 0.53 and indirect cost factor is 0.21. And we are asked to determine the total plant cost if A, all cost factors are applied to the cost of the delivered equipment. And B, the indirect cost factor is applied to the total direct cost. So again, not very difficult. So in A, we just add up the 0.49, 0.53 and the 0.21 with 1. And then we have our H. In the second case, B, we just add up the direct cost factors and we come to 2.02. And then we multiply that with 1 plus the 0.21. So we have a slightly different number. In the first case, we had 608,790. Second case, we have the 667,267. So they are quite different. So it's important to know that if you use factors, what exactly is in there and is that suitable for what you want to do? An issue on indirect costs, I will not talk a lot about that because it's management accounting. I expect that most of you have seen indirect costs in a management accounting course. Sometimes we have to rely on ABC casting, activity based casting. Just very briefly what it's about. The setting is a third party warehouse and assume that warehousing costs like building, maintenance, equipment, packaging materials, personnel or 300,000 per year. And we have three customers and each customer has a contract for 1500 pallet positions. So it's the storage square meters that they take in and that's also all the incoming and outgoing movements that are related to their stock. So at first, it might seem logical to split up the 300,000 evenly over the three customers in a euro per pallet position. So a very traditional way of computing indirect costs. But maybe that's not so logical. It's only logical when the three customers have similar activities. If, for instance, we have a situation where customers A and B always have reception and shipments in full pallets, but for customers C, only the receipts are in full pallets, but the shipping occurs in individual boxes. So that means that C has need for a lot more manipulations in the warehouse. So it seems fair that also that then C pays more than A and B. But in order to determine how much more that C should pay, we should make a more detailed analysis on the warehousing activities. And that exactly is what activity based costing is doing. Exercises, we have a separate section on exercises. If you go back to the indirect cost analysis, this is a very interesting example in the book. So it's an indirect cost analysis of medical equipment and manufacturing costs. So for those of you who have not had been in contact with indirect costs, it's definitely something an activity based costing. It's definitely interesting to have a look at it. I summarized the solution for you. We will not discuss it. It will not be part of the exam, but it's definitely interesting to have a look at. OK, that brings us to the end of this chapter. Cost estimation, what is it? What about accuracy? Learning curve. Very important. Maybe I should have underlined it because it's something extra. So don't forget to study it. It's not in handbook. And then we have the cost estimation. We saw some techniques. The per unit method, the cost indices, the cost capacity equations with the power law, with the factor method. Of course, we did not talk about it, but if you don't want to go with these cost estimation methods, you could rely on data from professional organizations or you could buy some design software or you could do some detailed engineering calculations that depends on how accurate your estimation needs to be. And then, well, at the end, we mentioned indirect costs, but that's something that is a bit outside the scope of this course.