 With cost-effectiveness analysis we already included one non-monetary criterion in our analysis. But what if we want to include more extra criteria? Well, then we have to go to multi-criteria decision making. In fact, multi-criteria decision making has two main streams, I would say. There's multi-objective decision making, which is more the design type of decision making, where there's an infinite large number of choices and we want to find the best option using a simultaneous optimization of competing criteria. Typical concept there is a Pareto front. Multi-attribute decision making, that's what we will do here, is more about selecting, evaluating, and there we work with a discrete, limited number of predetermined alternatives. The alternatives we try to prioritize to rank which one we want to choose the best. Note that in practice often multi-criteria decision making is used as a synonym for the last, for the multi-attribute decision making. So here you see an example of multi-objective decision making, but this is out of scope here. So here we have two examples with multiple criteria. The first is about three investment projects for enhancing occupational safety and working conditions beyond what is legally required. And then the question is which one is the best. We only have one cost per project, but we have two effects, two criteria that measure the quality of the projects and it's not quite clear which one is the best. We can't do an incremental analysis as we did before because there are two effects and we didn't see any technique yet to cope with that problem. Another example found in quite a few handbooks is about the hospital service in Brooklyn. They consider investment in a reorganization. They have some ideas. They can keep the number of ambulances, which is currently seven. So we can keep that at seven, but relocate them to a satellite garage. They could increase the number of ambulances to ten and relocate them in a satellite garage. Or they could have a number of cruising ambulances, six, eight or ten, instead of ambulances stationed at a garage. And then how to choose between these alternative scenarios. Well, the costs are rather simple to estimate, straightforward, but the impacts to consider. Well, how will you measure the effect? And then you could say, of course, well, the quality of health care. I could measure the number of deaths avoided by reorganizing the service. But then, of course, it's relevant, but it's not practical. Remember that practical was also one of the criteria for our effectiveness measure. Because why it's not practical? Well, first of all, hospitals will not be willing to share that information because of patient privacy. And moreover, it's difficult to estimate whether or not being five minutes earlier at the hospital would have saved a patient's life or not. Maybe in some cases it's possible, but certainly not in all cases. So we have to find some other way. And a way of doing it is, for instance, by saying, well, we could look at the average time for an ambulance to pick up a patient. That's one measure. But of course, we do not want the average time to be OK. But with, for instance, a normal distribution with a very long tail, that's saying, well, average time is OK. But there are patients that are never picked up or only picked up after hours. So we will also have a measure, which is the number of quick interventions. So less than 20 minutes. How we evaluate that, because it's difficult? Well, we will build a simulation model for that. And here you see what is happening with the process, in fact. We have to picture the process. So there's some waiting time. There's a dispatch delay. Then the ambulance is traveling to the patient. There's a pickup delay. Then traveling back to the hospital, a drop off and then back to the base. But in fact, we only have to take into account the dark blue ones, because these are the things that are different between the scenarios that we want to investigate. Picking up a patient, well, once the ambulance is there, it doesn't matter where or how it came there. It's just the same time for all cases. OK, so that's giving you some idea of what happens when you pick up a patient. And then you can see that the ambulance is there. It's just the same time for all cases. OK, so that's giving you some idea on the complex. OK, so let's have a closer look at the multi attribute decision making methods that are around. Often, as I told you, the MCDM is used as a synonym. Now, just copied the list from Wikipedia. So you see that there are quite a number of different methods available. So picking the best method is not straightforward, because all methods have strong and weak points. Just for illustrative purposes, you have a table there pointing out what criteria you could use for picking a method. Is literature helpful? Well, there are many different classification frameworks for multi criteria decision making methods. So there's a lot around, but there's no straight answer to what is the best method. One way of classifying MCDM methods is by making a difference between non compensatory ones and compensatory ones. The non compensatory ones do not permit trade-offs between attributes. So if you have an unfavorable value in one attribute, it cannot be offset by a favorable one in another attribute. Each attribute stands on its own. Typical examples, as you see there, are the maxmin and the maxmax. These methods, however, are only applicable when attribute values are comparable with one another, because they are measured in the same unit or transformed to a common scale. In the business context that we are looking at for engineering economy purposes, these are not used a lot. Then we are looking at compensatory ones. So a slight decline in one attribute is acceptable if it's compensated by an enhancement in one or more other attributes. We have three big classes, the value based methods that are using the value or the perception of the decision maker in real numbers. Outranking methods, where we use a principle of dominance, however, without attaching a numerical value to that preference. And then the reference point methods, also called compromise ranking, which are based on a distance to an ideal situation or a distance away from a worst case. We will see examples of the value based ones and the reference point ones. So the methods that are underlined, we will see an example. But first, what are the steps? Well, the steps are that we start with alternatives that are well defined, discrete and mutually exclusive and preferably a limited number. So these methods are not fit to compare a hundred different alternatives, so we rather stick to a few alternatives. Then we have to decide on criteria. We have to assign weights to the criteria. We have to assign scores for the alternatives for each of the criteria. Then somehow we have to aggregate the information and then we have to make an evaluation and selection. OK, this is just also for illustrative purposes. This is an example of the use of MCDA in health care. OK, let's start with the criteria. Picking criteria is not straightforward. We have to be careful that we find good criteria, so we should involve all stakeholders in the decision process. We should have enough, but not too many criteria. So rule of thumb is that the number of criteria is between five and ten. If you have more criteria, it becomes very not very difficult, but it becomes a very tedious job to continuity analysis. There are some requirements and guidelines. Definitely exhaustive means that while we try to have enough criteria to cover all important aspects. Non-redundant, we don't want to measure the same thing twice. Coherent, measurable, verifiable. So we want something that is clearly defined. For instance, if you say the number of accidents, that's easy to take into account. If you say flexibility, for instance, that's a lot more difficult to define and to measure. An example. So the setting is the manufacturer of industrial vehicles, the painting department. The problem at hand is they want to buy new masks because of occupational safety, occupational diseases, because you're working with solvents if you paint. Technical risks, legislation and a market study left the company with three alternatives. Now they have to select between those three alternatives. So three, the alternative each come from a different supplier. And this list that you see there is what they think to take into account. I would suggest that you have a look at it. Think about these criteria. Think about how would you handle that to take the analysis one step further. I will not discuss it now. I suggest that we discuss it in the open office session that is coming up. OK, then we have to decide on the weights, the scores. Two types. We have the compositional ones and the decompositional methods. In compositional methods, and that's the ones that we will be looking at here, criteria weights and alternative scores are evaluated separately. So first, as you see, the decision maker decides on the relative importance of the criteria by setting weights. Then the decision maker assigns scores for each criteria for all alternatives. And then one and two are combined. We will see examples of that in a minute. The decompositional methods, they are like discrete choice experiments, paprika as an example. And you see from the example there, the decision maker is presented with a choice between two situations. And in these two situations, already an evaluation of the criteria is given. The example comes from a cobot selection problem. Now, how to assign weights to the criteria? Well, there are different methods. Here you see classification from literature. So we have subjective methods, objective methods, integrated methods. In the remainder of this chapter, we will focus on subjective weighting methods. And as a name is telling you, these are based on expert opinion. There's a direct method. So the basic option is that you allocate a budget of 100 points as a decision maker over the different criteria. And the more important criteria is, the more points are allocated and thus the higher the weight is. You see an example there in the table. There are many, many, many modifications possible. One modification is that you say to the decision maker, give a weight of 100 for the criteria that you find the most important. And then assign values to the other criteria that are... Instead of asking directly to the decision maker to assign weights, we can use an indirect ranking, where you're asking the decision maker to rank the criteria in order of decreasing importance for him or her. And then we use a formula to determine the weights. Different formulas are possible. As you see, there's a rank sum, the rank exponential, the rank reciprocal. And in the table below, you see the outcome. We can choose between six study subjects. We see the ranking in the second column and then we see the weights that are assigned in each of the cases and also normalized. So they can be quite different. Maybe this example to go a little bit deeper on the difference. So we have an example where we want to buy a car. There are seven criteria that we can take into account and we rank them from one to seven. So we are most concerned about safety while the brand is not so important to us. The table shows you that in case we would have a uniform weight, then the weights would be 0.1429. If we use the rank sum formula, we have these weights. If you use the rank reciprocal, we have those weights. Now, I want to draw your attention to the fact that there's a big difference, especially for the first criteria, at least the criteria ranked first. If you look here, you see that in case we use a rank sum, there's not so much difference. Well, of course, the weights are decreasing, but not by big steps. While here, if you look at this, at the rank reciprocal, we see that the first criterion gets a very high weight and then the weights are decreasing. So it depends a bit on the decision-maker's attitude or preference. If the decision-maker really feels very strong about, in this case, safety and really wants to emphasize that by putting a very high weight on the safety, then we go for this approach. If there is a ranking by the decision-maker, but the decision-maker is not really very keen on having very high weights on the first we ranked criterion, we go for that option. So we can, in fact, fine-tune the weights by choosing a method that is adopted to our decision-making attitude. Pairwise comparison is an often used method. The decision-maker is comparing the criteria two by two, so we need quite some comparisons. That's one of the reasons why it's important not to have too many criteria. The idea is that it's easy for the decision-maker to compare two by two, that making a ranking from a list of ten is more difficult. So the decision-maker is comparing them two by two and is expressing the perception of the relative importance of the criteria by an intensity value, so I find A five times more important than B, for instance. From there, the criterion weights are calculated. A nice touch in this method is that we also can do a check on the consistency of the decision-maker by computing a consistency ratio, and if it's not okay, we can take further action. Decision-makers are sometimes not consistent. They say that they find A more important than B, B more important than C, but then they say that C is more important than A, which is a little bit strange. So that's a nice touch of this method. Example for an investment in COTS for a hospital. There are three criteria, so it's just a little example. It's about adjustment range, adjustment easiness of these side panels, and also patient safety is considered. So we are saying that adjustment range is more important than adjustment easiness, and it's even three times more important. Adjustment range is less important than patient safety, intensity factor five. Adjustment easiness is less important than patient safety with an intensity factor of seven. So we put that in a matrix. Obviously here we have one, and if we have a three here, we have one over three there. If we have a five there, we have one over five, et cetera. Definitely if one is three times more important, then the other one is only one-third of importance. And then we do a normalization step, and we can compute our weights. Let's forget about the swing weighting. We already saw some methods, and this one is very complex. Another way of working is using brainstorming. So you just put all the stakeholders together around the table, and you start discussing until you have consensus on the weights that you want to use. In case the discussion goes out of hand, because there are some dominant figures and some people that really want to push through their opinion, you can go for a nominal group technique, which is a more structured way of doing a brainstorm, which also ensures a more fair input for all groups. Okay, the next step that we need to take is we need to aggregate the information and to select and evaluate the alternatives. So we will see some examples. We will see the linear additive methods, sometimes also called the simple additive weighting. It's a value-based method. It's easy. It's intuitive. It's often used. It has a drawback that it's rather simplistic, but still it can help decision-making. Then we will see an example of AHP-ANP, used a lot in companies, in the public sector, in healthcare, so a very popular one. And then we will see one example of the reference point method, namely the consensus method. It's just a basic example. And we will also illustrate with this example the concept of utility. So let's start with the linear additive method, sometimes also called simple additive weighting method. You see it's rather simple. We have our criteria. We have our weights. The sum of weights is 1. We have our alternatives. And each alternative is scored for each criterion, and then we make a weighted sum, weight times score plus weight times score, etc. So we end up with having a weighted score, weighted total score for each alternative and the one with the best wins. So it's rather simple, but still it can help our decision-making because it's making the decision more transparent. It's clear for everybody involved what were the scores. It's also clear what were the weights. So it's simple, but helpful. This is an example. So we have an automotive plant and they investigated four options for a production line. And besides money, so the present word, they also wanted to include aspects like speed, capacity, reliability, safety, flexibility, standardization. They decided on weights. Every installation had a score for every one of the criteria. And then we make a weighted total score. This weighted total score, by the way, we could call a total effectiveness score. What this example illustrates is that it's in fact kind of a cost-effectiveness analysis. Point one about that is that effectiveness is here considered to be a composite measure. So we have different aspects of what we call effectiveness. While in the cost-effectiveness method we saw before, we only had one effectiveness measure, single one. In terms of multi-criteria decision-making, you could say that here we took out the monetary aspect. We could have considered a list with speed, reliability, safety, flexibility, standardization and cost. Here it was chosen not to do so, so cost was taken out. Sometimes this is done because people do not feel comfortable with cost being one of the criteria because costs, budgets, it's an important issue. And they like to see it as a separate element in the analysis. Let's have a look how we want to visualize things. Multi-criteria decision-making as any business tool is helping us to make decisions. It's not making decisions for us. So we want to discuss the outcome of multi-criteria decision-making analysis. We can work with the table. We could also go for a graphical representation where we visualize different scores. Each option has different scores, so we want to visualize that. Here in the bar chart we could also go for a radar plot, which is another representation. Personally, I think the radar plot is quite useful here because we see dominance. For instance, here we see that the yellow one is the option 4, is quite dominant for these three criteria, but it's dominated for the other. So it's providing some insight, but I must say that's a rather subjective evaluation. Some people might be more comfortable with the absolute scores in bar chart. Also something that we could do, of course, is we could have cost, cost-effectiveness, cost versus effectiveness, and then we have different projects. And then we could see here the effectiveness border and points on the effectiveness border indicated for a given budget. No project with larger effectiveness could be found or that to have that effectiveness, this is the best alternative. The best alternative since it has the lowest cost for that level of effectiveness. The other method that we want to discuss is AHP and ANP. They were invented by Satti. Here you see how they work. So we have a goal, we have criteria, and there are alternatives. Now, why is it called hierarchy? Well, it's called hierarchy, as you see here, because we have different levels of criteria. We have here, it's a problem for supplier selection. We have product development capability, manufacturing capability, quality capability, and cost and time. So that's level one. We go one level in the hierarchy down. And then for each of these criteria is further split up in sub-criteria. You can imagine even more and more levels. So that's why it's called criteria. It's called hierarchy. So, if there is a link between the sub-criteria, we have to go for analytic network process, and then it becomes a little bit more complex. So usually people try to formulate a problem so that we can just use a simple AHP. This is an example from a thesis. It was about maintenance work order, sorry, evaluation for fighting aircrafts. Not really the topic of this course, but what I want to show you here is the hierarchy. So we have, it's about the functional and technical aspects, and we want to consider maintenance quality, availability, and productivity and mission impact. If we see the weights here, the sum of weights is 100. For instance, availability has component reliability, maintainability and support, and also here the sum of weights is 100. In this case, this was used to evaluate maintenance work orders. Another example of, and here we used ANP, was from a recent PhD, where the inventory performance management of a hospital was looked at. And here you see the different criteria that were important, and here you see the different stakeholders like pharmacy, operating theater, interventional radiology, and cardiovascular center, head of logistics department, and then we have an overall ranking. So you see different stakeholders can have different opinions, but how to tackle that is beyond the scope here. Now what is the consensus method? It's a reference point method. Basic idea here is that, well, this is an example here for two criteria. So we have U1 and U2. They are all utilities, but let's say they are criteria. I will explain the difference in a minute. So when they can vary between plus one and minus one, minus one and plus one is the score for the criteria. A definitely is the ideal situation because we have the maximum score for each of the criteria. Criteria B definitely is the worst case because we have the worst possible score for each of the two criteria. What we then have is, in fact, we have a plane in which we can locate our alternatives, and then we can pick the alternative, which is either the closest to the ideal situation or as far away as possible from the worst case. There is a slight difference, or there might be a slight difference in outcome as the one minute. So if you want to be close here, you want to emphasize on the strong points of your alternatives. If you want to stay away from the worst point, you are definitely aiming at alternatives with no weak points or as few weak points as possible. So you express that with distance functions, and you can, by choosing your P value, you can have a Euclidean distance-like thing, or you can change the weight. Now, the utility function, it's offering you a possibility to, again, put in your own decision-maker attitude. Suppose that the performance scores for the criteria or the alternatives, let's say the alternatives, or between 0 and 10. Well, that's fine. That's what we asked the decision-maker. Please score the alternatives on a scale from 0 to 10. What is a little bit annoying is that for the method we need utilities, utilities between minus 1 and plus 1. So we have to convert our scale from 0 to 10 to a scale from minus 1 to plus 1. What we could do is just have a linear relationship. That makes a lot of sense, for instance, for costs. What we also could do is have another way. This is one which is used a lot. What does it mean? It means that, well, here I don't have a lot to say between a score of 0 or 1. It doesn't make a lot of difference for me. And here, well, 9 or 10, I don't see a lot of difference, but in between I want to make a distinction. Or you could even say, well, you know, everything that is below 4, I don't care about. Everything that is above 5.5, I really like. Then you have this. So you can put your decision-maker's attitude in there. I already mentioned a few times the decision-maker's attitude that you could put in there. Now, is this positive? Well, yes, it's positive because decision-makers have their own perception, they have their own point of view, they have their own way of making decisions. So it's important, it's nice that you can put in your own attitude, but sometimes this is seen as a weakness of these methods because people can say that you can manipulate. Saying if you're not happy with the outcome, you just will change your utility function until you are having the outcome that you prefer. An example from a glass-maker's company. So they're making flat glass for windows. So here is the production department and the window sheets. They are put on pallets, special pallets. And here the pallets are put on a transfer line. That's an input-output station. An AGV is picking up the pallets and is putting them in a warehouse, which is much bigger than a drone here, but okay, just for illustrational sake. If a customer is asking for windows, the sheets are, sorry, by the AGV is picking up the sheets from the warehouse, is putting them here, input-output station, and a transfer line is bringing them to the finishing department. Now what is the problem? The problem is that this AGV sometimes has difficulties, it fails, it's getting stuck, and then somebody has to enter this area in order to fix it. That's rather dangerous, glass is a sharp thing, and if this AGV all of a sudden starts moving, occupational accidents can happen. So the company wants to do something about it and they have some ideas. They can either put up posters, they can put the power-interruptor manual, so that's situated here, and before the operator is entering, he or she pushes. Or we can have a power-interruptor, which is an automated one, that if somebody is entering here, then the line stops and it can be done by the supplier or it can be done by a consultant. And then you have criteria that you want to take into account. Initial cost, maintenance cost, downtime at installation, mean time to repair, mean time between failure, worker satisfaction, impact on safety. I'll give you this example to show you that for these criteria we can have different units of measurement, we can even have a mix of qualitative and quantitative data, so here we have numbers. Here we have safety impact, very slight impact, considerable, considerable, same for worker satisfaction, so it's perfectly okay to have that as a starting situation. Of course we will have to convert that into numbers and these numbers will then be converted into utilities. So here you see the example, we have our alternatives, we have our numbers, we have the weights, we have the utility function, which here is a Gaussian utility function, so the one that is in the middle. It was looking like this from the score from 0 to 10, minus 1 to plus 1. And here you see the difference with the distance functions and you can pick the one with the best outcome. So that's how it's working. Consensus method is a very simple example, you can do it in Excel, Vcore, Anthopsys, or also examples of this type of reference point method, but they are a little bit more complex. So a final note on MCDA is that it's popular and still increasing interest. What is now the benefit for the decision process? It's giving you a complete picture, it's not just about money, but you can include other criteria that can be tangible or less tangible. It brings transparency to the decision making. I mentioned a few times as the stakeholders well that makes sure that the final solution will be accepted. It's making it more easy to accept the decision if you have been part of the decision making instead of just being informed of the decision. You can incorporate your decision attitude, but of course picking the most appropriate methods can be quite hard because there are a lot of them around and not all decision makers have the time to spend reading about these methods in order to pick one. Data collection can be difficult, can take up a lot of time in case that stakeholders do not have the same opinion, that they stuck each with their own initial ideas, you have a problem and we have to be careful that we are not manipulated. In terms of tools, you might be quite happy to hear that there is a lot of software available, even open source software. Extra illustrations, which I will not discuss now, we have a separate session for that. This is an illustration of a paper, it's quite an old paper, but it's a nice illustration of a decision making situation, practical one where different elements come together and where you feel that at the end that a multi-criteria decision making tool would have been helpful in order to make a decision. This is an example of the PhD I was telling about where A&P is used to select performance indicators for operating room supply chain management. What has been done by Karen was that she made a long list of all possible performance indicators that could be used for that supply chain performance measurement and then what she did was using A&P to pick the ones that were important in a specific case, therefore she used the input of many of the stakeholders. This is a discussion case, this is also something I would like to briefly do with you in the open office if there is interest for that. It's a case that is illustrating or giving a flavor, I would not say illustrating because we do not have a lot of time to spend on it, but it's giving an indication, it's making you aware of how difficult it is or how easy it is to do a multi-criteria analysis in practice. Even if you stick with a very basic one like the linear additive method you can still run into a number of difficulties. The case is based on a real life case, so we have a medium sized company that is making light bulbs, there was a recent inspection whether or not governmental regulations were followed and some potential problems concerning occupational safety were found. The threat for the company is that they have to pay fines or that they can even lose a license to operate if they do not quickly fix the problem. Then you see some alternatives that are there and in the next slide you see how we can solve it, but it would be nice if you could actually do the exercise to give an idea on the difficulties that you run into when you want to apply it in a real life situation. So that was it for this chapter, we encountered the public sector and we saw the opportunity to take into account also non-monetary criteria in our analysis.