 Let's have a look at the concept of economic service life which is very important in replacement studies. It's economic service life, if you see ESL in the context of replacement study it's economic service life, not expected service life. So basically that's the number of years as we already saw in one of the first slides for which the total annual worth of costs is minimal. And that total annual worth of costs we compute by the capital recovery and the annual worth of the annual operating costs. I think you'll remember from chapter 5 and 6, you'll remember this formula. Here we see it in a little bit of more detail. So as we have to do a year by year analysis for k years since we have to figure out for what year that total annual worth of cost is minimal. So we have to do a year by year analysis so we do it for every k years. So here the k each time is changed and again we have the formula. Let's have a look, maybe that will be easier so it's a very short story this time. We have an example about a 3 year old manufacturing process asset, let's call it a manufacturing machine. And it's considered for early replacement, its current market value is 13,000. Estimate future market values and annual operating costs for the next 5 years or given in table 11.1, which is this one. And now the question is what is the economic service life of this defender if the interest rate is 10%. So the table for 10% I put it here, it's a bit more convenient for computations. Now we have to do a period by period, year by year analysis. I repeated the data there. So year by year analysis, easy. We draw the cash flow diagram for k is 1 years, for k is 2 years, for k is 3 years. Similarly for k is 4 years, k is 5 years. And we compute annual worth, which is not so difficult like here if you see for k1 we have this initial amount. We have the salvage value, the market value, called there. We have our annual operating costs and I think you are quite good at formulating these equations by now. And we have minus 6,800. Then for k years, well we have of course this still remains the same. We have our annual operating costs for the first year, annual operating costs for the second year and we have a new salvage value. And again we make our computations and then we do the whole thing again for 3 years, for 4 years, for 5 years. And then we see that what we look at is, or what we find is that for 3 years we have our economic service life. This is a solution by computer, by Excel. This is a very similar example. It comes from the 7th edition of the book, the previous one was from the 6th edition. I leave it to you to explore it, you have the explanations about all the data that you need. It's completely similar to what we just did. You have the tips there to come to a complete solution. If it would not be working out for you, please let me know and I will explain again. One important point that is also made is that the marginal costs, well they are defined as a year by year estimate of the cost. The cost to own and operate an asset. And there are 3 components, the cost of ownership. And here the cost of ownership is the loss in market value. So we can expect that the market value of an asset, of our old asset is going down over time. So if you don't sell it in a given year, the next year, well it will not be worth so much. So you will have a loss in ownership because you owned it, you will have lost market value. Of course if you did not sell it, you did not earn interest on your selling amount of money. And of course we also have the annual operating cost. And then what we will see in the next example is that annual worth of the marginal cost is equal to the total annual worth of costs. So we have an example, again the same example in fact with a 3 year old machine. And you see the data which is here and here. It is a little bit messy maybe because the data is not all grouped together. What I try to do to make it a little bit more clear is I try to take it apart for you. Let's focus on year 2. So the data, again the data in blue. Now we are after the marginal cost for that year. We have a loss in market value because we did not sell it last year. We only have the 8000 now instead of the 9000 which is a loss of 1000. We did not sell it at 9000. That means that we did not get the interest of 10% which is 900. We have the estimation here for the annual operating cost. So the marginal cost for this year is 4600. If we then have to compute this amount, well we have our formula which we are quite familiar with by now. And we see that we have this amount. And this amount is exactly what we also obtained in this computation that we made just a while ago. So this is what it shows.