 In this chapter we will study depreciation methods. First we will talk a little bit about the terminology, next we will see four important depreciation methods and we will briefly touch upon depletion methods. So what is depreciation about? Well depreciation is about a reduction in value over time of an asset. That reduction in value can be due to wear and tear, to use, to deterioration, to obsolescence. And the method to work with that depreciation is depreciation. Important to note is that depreciation does not represent an actual cash flow, nor does it necessarily reflect the actual use pattern of the asset during the ownership. There is something like tax depreciation, and that is what you are allowed to do by the government, and it determines partly the amount of taxes you have to pay. So it does not reflect necessarily how you have been using the asset. Terminology, there is nothing very special about it. The first cost or unadjusted base, that is what we have been calling P so far. We have the book value, that is new. That is the unadjusted base, the first cost, with the adjustments made for the depreciations, the recovery period, the market value, salvage value. Depreciation, there is a depreciation rate, which is determining the amount of depreciation. You multiply it by the book value or by the unadjusted basis, and then you have your depreciation amount. Personal property and real property, slightly different approaches. The depreciation methods that we will study here are the single line, which is the most simple one, the declining balance and the double declining balance, which is an accelerated method. The other two are also accelerated methods. Some of your digits are here, it is not used so much anymore, but in order to be complete we see it here. And then the modified accelerated cost recovery system, which is a US model. It is described in the book, other countries have similar systems. Straight line depreciation, as the name is saying, it is a system that is taking into account a book value decrease that is linear with time. Depreciation rate is 1 over n, and it is staying that way. So there you see the amount of depreciation in year T, it is b minus s, so our unadjusted basis, our p, minus a salvage value, and then multiplied by d, and d is 1 over n. And the book value in a given year is then b minus d times dt. Maybe a little example, so we have a situation in which we have a first cost of 50,000, so that is our b value. We have a 10,000 estimated salvage value, which is our s after 5 years, and we are asked to calculate the annual depreciation and to compute and plot the book value. Simple, well we know what dt is, it is b minus s over n, and it is constant. So that means that after 1 year our book value is 50,000, our starting b minus 1 time our depreciation, and after 5 years we have 50,000, our starting b minus 5 times our depreciation, and that brings us to 10,000, our salvage value, and you see we have a straight line. The declining balance and the double declining balance depreciation are accelerated methods, which means that they are going faster than linear, at least in the beginning that is. They are also known as fixed percentage or uniform percentage methods. The annual depreciation here is determined by multiplying the book value at the beginning of the year by a fixed percentage, and thus the depreciation amount decreases year by year, because of course the book value is decreasing year by year. It does not use an estimated salvage value, it is its own implied salvage value. Maybe, well you see the formulas there to the right, but just to help you, so we have d1 is then d times b, book value 1 is b minus d1, so if you manipulate the formula a little bit that becomes b times 1 minus d, then the d2 is d times the book value in year 1, which makes it d times d minus 1 times b, so the book value in year 2 is then etc. b times 1 minus d square etc. The implied salvage value after n years is then given by bvn, which is b times 1 minus d to the power n, and that gives us d as being 1 minus ratio s over b to the power 1 over n, so it is just some elementary algebra. Okay, an example, so we have a company called Freeport-McMoRan Mining Company, and it has purchased some ore grading unit for 80,000. That unit has an anticipated life of 10 years, a salvage value of 10,000, now we are asked to have a look at the declining balance and the double declining balance. Okay, what I didn't say is that the double declining balance is using a d2 over n, so that's as fast as it can go, 2 over n. So here, the double declining balance, so the d factor is here 2 over n. Okay, let's go further, now for the simple, well for the simple, for the declining balance you see the formula for d, for d here, and you see that it's indeed less than the 2 over n, which is 0.0 for the double declining balance. And here you see the values, like for instance here, that d2, here you see the d's, d2, they give the example of d2, is 12,000, so how do we get to the 12,000? Well that's the d factor here, times the book value in the previous year, and the book value in year 2 is then, well it's then this minus this gives this. So it's rather simple, and at the end we make some adjustments to arrive at the 10,000. And the double declining balance is similar, but here the amount is, sorry the rate that we use is not 0.1877, but is 0.2, but for the rest it's similar. Then sum of the years digit, it's an oldie, it's also accelerated, but not as rapidly as a double declining balance, you see the formulas. D is n minus t plus 1 divided by sum, and sum is in fact the sum of the years times b minus s. The sum of the years, what does it mean? Well if the period is 5, then sum is 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 plus 5, and we see the formulas for dVt and dt. So here also we have a time, well the rate is dependent on the time, it's not like with a straight line depreciation. An example, so with the sum of the years digit depreciation, 2 years for electro-optic equipment with an initial cost or an adjusted basis of 25,000 and a salvage value of 4,000 and a recovery period of 8,000. So what you see here, if we start with sum, so it's 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 plus etc, plus 8, this is the formula, I don't know if you remember your formulas for rows, somewhere from your first bachelor year, and then we have dt, so it's pretty straight forward. Sometimes, but we are not really looking into that in this course, we are having a depreciation rate which is actually dependent on the usage, especially for instance mobile equipment like earth moving equipment for instance, or heavy trucks, we are using this method. Ok, now let's go with the macros, the others were book depreciations, this is a text depreciation method. Here the rates that we are supposed to use, again the depreciation in year t is a rate times an adjusted basis, but now u is that these rates come from tables. Something which we will not look at, for the next chapter is that this is really the US system that makes that text computations can be pretty complicated, but we will only work with an effective text rate. But that's for next chapter. Now how does this macros work? You see that something is prescribed, so you cannot choose your end and say I will take 20 years for a simple device for instance, it's determined by law. The type of equipment you are talking about, it has to do with being heavy equipment or not, it has to do with the use you have for it, it determines the allowable end. And you see for instance for computers and peripherals it's 5 years, but if you are looking for water transport we are looking at 10 years, municipal sewers we are looking at 20 years, so it's prescribed, you cannot choose. An example about baseline, having invested in workstations and remodeling software, initial investment or an adjusted basis if you want, was $4000 and after 3 years they estimate that the salvage value will be 5%. They want to compare two depreciation methods, one being the macros and the other one being the double declining balance. They want to use both systems with a period of 3 years and they are curious to know what it will mean for the total depreciation after 2 years and for the book value after 2 years. Let's look at the table, what I put in a green frame, it's what we need for the macros. These are the rates, these rates come from the table that we just looked at and we know that the depreciation value in a given year is that rate times the unadjusted basis. So that means that 400 times 0.3333 gives 133,320, if we subtract that from our book value we get the 266,680. Then again this amount we get by multiplying 400,000 by this rate and we have this amount subtracted from there we have our 88,000 etc. For here for our double declining balance we know that we have a D which is constant and the D is the maximum one, it's 2 over N so 2 over here 3 so it's 0.666666 etc. And we multiply the previous book value so here 400,000 times that 0.66667 gives us this amount we subtracted the depreciation from the book value to get our new book value and then we multiply that book value by our 0.66666 and we get this amount as depreciation. So that's how it works, so in the two years if we look at two years here we have these two amounts, here we have these two amounts and if you look at the book value after that time we have 88,000 and here 44,000 so quite a bit different. Depletion methods sometimes maybe if you are lucky enough to be the owner for instance of a gold mine or you have some oil and gas fields things like that then we are looking at a different way of computing depreciations and we are looking at a depletion amount. Something we will not pursue further here but you have an example in case you want to see how it works it's similar to the depreciation. So what is very important here, well important is that it's not an actual cash flow so that's a very important thing it's something that you do on paper or by computer but it's not actual cash flow so there is no money that is handed to you or there is no money that you have to hand over to somebody else so it's not an actual cash flow. But it's interesting because it's helping you to save on taxes and of course tax savings that is an actual cash flow. So that's about it you will see that the most important things or you will I think start to appreciate what depreciation can do when we study the taxes in the next chapter.