 Let's have a very short discussion on the effects of inflation. I do not consider that to be a major aspect of the course, but I think it's good that we cover it briefly. So what is the impact of inflation and how do we deal with it in our computations? So what is inflation? Well, inflation means that our purchasing power is going down. That means that we need more money to obtain the same amount of a product or service before inflation was there. Or we could say that our dollar, euro value is decreasing. So it's not the same as the time value of money. It's something that comes on top of that. So maybe that's important to realize and to know. So we are working with an inflation rate, F, so that's the percent, is a percent per time period. So it's handled in the same way as a regular interest rate. So for the example, if we have an inflation rate of 5% per year, then $100 today will require $105 to buy the same amount next year. Or, well, you see there a formula representing this calculation. So again, inflation is on top of the interest rate. Assume that the firm desires to purchase an asset that is costing $209,000 in today's dollars. Assume a reasonable interest rate of 4 per year, then that same piece of equipment would cost quite a lot more. So it's not an interest rate or a rate of return. Again, let's make that clear. There are three important rates. We have the real or inflation free interest rate. So that's the rate at which interest is earned. The effect of inflation has been removed. So it represents actual or real gain received charge on investments or borrowed funds. Then we have the market rate, which is the inflation adjusted interest rate. And then we have the pure interest rate. So here we can start making computations. I think they are pretty straightforward. So we have an example where we have the $5,000 now inflated at 4% per year at an interest rate of 10%. So we see the computations in the table where we have the cost increased due to the inflation. So then we have the cost in future dollars, the future cost in constant dollars, and then the present worth. So I think they are pretty straightforward computations. So we can maybe try to combine them. So we start with the real interest rate, I, and assume that F is a future dollar amount with inflation built in. So that means that we have V is F divided by 1 plus I to the power n, as we usually have. But you have to combine it with an inflation rate F. So we have to, as we treat it in exactly the same way as we treat a regular interest rate, we will divide by 1 plus F to the power n. So that means that we will have 1 plus F times 1 plus I. That is giving us 1 plus I plus F plus IF as the new factor that we were looking for. And we call this I plus F plus I times IF, we call I subscript F, which is the market rate. And so we can use it in our formulas, in our regular factor formulas that we have, as we use a regular interest rate, but you have to know that it's the market rate. And then we can start to use that IF to compute future worth of actual amounts. You see the formulas, you see the calculations that go with those formulas. I will leave it at your own discretion to try out these things. They're really pretty straightforward. What is important to note maybe is that inflation will have an impact on our capital recovery calculations. Actually, we will need more dollars if inflation is there. As you see in the example, so if a small company invests 150,000 in a production line machine, how much does it receive every year to recover the investment in five years? The real interest rate is 10 percent, we are familiar with that. And the inflation rate is 4 percent. Then we could not just, we cannot just use the 10 percent we have. We really have to take into account the 4 percent as well. So we have to calculate our new interest rate to use in our formula for our factor. And so we don't have, we have IF is 0.10 plus 0.04 plus 0.10 times 0.04, which makes 14.4. And which has an impact on our capital recovery. So it's not without any consequence. Normally, inflation is like 2 to 8 percent per year. Some countries, especially between currencies or unstable political situation, can have higher hyperinflation. And the only good advice if you have hyperinflation is to spend your money as quickly as possible because it's losing value very quickly. It's also very difficult then to talk about engineering economy calculations because, well, the situation is very unreliable, unstable, uncertain. A few simple exercises that we can deal with later on. So very short chapter. As I said, it's definitely not the core of the course, but we need to know something about it. We need to know that sometimes we need to adjust our regular interest rate with a correction, if you want to call it that way, for inflation.