 So this is a challenge for you, I mean a challenge that is not in the book but that is challenging your critical thinking. If you google replacement models or you go to SignDirect and you look for replacement models you find a different type of models. Well, I don't know, it's up to you to decide whether they are different or similar. I give here two examples, so we have here a book, maintenance, replacement and reliability. And here we have a survey of replacement models and there are thousands of maintenance replacement models around. So let's have a look what type of questions do these models answer. Well, for instance, I have an asset for which maintenance costs keep increasing every year. Or I have an asset for which the probability of failure keeps increasing with time. What is the best time to replace this asset with a new one? Or if I use a replacement policy, should I base myself on asset age or maybe fixed period? And if I have a set of identical devices, should I then replace them one by one or should I invest more money and replace them all at once? So these are the type of questions. I have a very small example of such a model for you, a very simple one. So we are talking about small welding robots costing 7000 euros, maximum use for life is 5 years, maintenance costs are CK, which are expressed as 1000K and K being the equipment age. We have some historical data and supplier information on probabilities of unrepairable failures that are given there. So first year is 10%, second year is 10%, third year is 20% and so on. And yearly we can decide whether to replace the equipment by a new one or not. And then they ask what is the optimum replacement timing. To the right you see the expected life of the robot using the failure probabilities and the expected costs that we have that are associated with that life. And then there we see that also the costs that we compute, expected costs divided by expected life. And then we see that here after 4 years seems to be the best time to replace the robot. This is a repair limit problem, that is what it is called in literature. It is one of the types of replacement models. So basically what we do is we replace the robot when maintenance costs become too high. The theory that is responsible for these type of formulas is called renewal theory. It is part of operations research models specifically developed for this type of problems. There are two hypotheses. One hypothesis is as good as new. Meaning that each time of course if you buy a new robot you have a new robot. That is fine. But it is also saying that if you do corrective maintenance the robot is as good as new. Which is not always maybe realistic. But we are not considering that here. But if you do preventive maintenance also you make the machine as good as new. And then we can use this formula which we did there. So my question to you is, it is called replacement model. It is about replacing assets, finding the right time to replace an asset. What differences, what similarities do you see? So it just requires some critical thinking of you. We will come back to that with the exercises.