 So far we have been working with data, data that was considered to be deterministic. Even if it were estimates, we assumed it to be deterministic parameters. Today we are going to do something different. We are going to talk about sensitivity analysis in order to cope with the non-accuracy, I would say, of our data. We will talk about risk under uncertainty and decision making under uncertainty. And we will talk about decision trees for stage decisions. We will see that we also have a probabilistic component there. And we will see case study. It will be case study as explained to you, not one to be solved, but there are some very interesting elements in it that makes the theory a little bit more realistic. Okay, sensitivity analysis. I think we can be very brief on that because we covered it already last week in the open office. So what is the idea? The idea is that you are not too confident in your result of your investment analysis because you know that you have been using estimates for parameters, for instance for annual operating cost. And you want to check whether a change in value of that given parameter will affect your outcome of the analysis. And we can work with expected values if you have a probability distribution for that parameter. Or we can work with scenarios like we have a pessimistic scenario saying, well, annual operating cost will double for instance, or most likely it will stay the same. Or optimistic, I think they will be decreasing by 10% a year. So that's the situation. Here you have the explanation for simulation analysis. We're using a Monte Carlo sampling approach. I think most of you are familiar with that. If not, let me explain things using an example. So what is this example about? So we have a model. We have a present-word model, which is the present-word of the cash flows in minus the cash flow outs. By the way, this example is so simple that we could work with an expected value of that present-word. But let's go for a simulation approach. We have the cash flow in here, data cash flow out. As we see, there's no deterministic value, but there's a probability. We think that it can be 50,000 with a probability of 30%. It can be 60,000 with a probability of 40%. And it can be 70,000 with a probability of 30%. And also we're not sure about the cash flow out. It can be 45% probability for 50,000 and 55% for 70,000. How do we do the sampling? Well, what we do is we make a cumulative probability distribution. So here we have 30,000, 70,000. Here 45,000. And then we associate random numbers between 0 and 99 with these cumulative probabilities. So that means that here random number 1 stands for the random number that we will use to generate cash flow ins. Random number 2 stands for the random number that we will use to generate cash flows out. So here we have 30, so we have numbers from 0 to 29. Then we go to 70, so that's 30 to 69. And then 70 to 99. And here in a similar fashion from 0 to 44 and 45 to 99. Now we start generating random numbers. The first random number generated is 46. We look at 46 is here, so we will use a cash flow in of 60,000. The random number generated here is 81. 81 is here, so we have 70,000. That means that cash flow in minus cash flow out gives us a present worth of minus 10,000. Okay, we generate our next random number, 30, which is here, is again 60,000. Next here we have 8 as a random number, so we are here. It's 50,000, so we have a plus. So what we do basically is we make a statistical experiment. We draw from two distributions, one for each of the cash flows and then we combine them. So we are running experiments. So we need some design of experiments in order to have a confidence interval that is acceptable. So you see here, well, now here we had minus 10,000, here we have plus 10,000. So the average is 0, but that would not be a very wise thing to say. So we need a lot of these statistical experiments in order to have an average with a small enough deviation. So basically that's how simulation is working. And we need it because here more than one parameter is changing at the same time. A very often used simulation also here for investment calculations. Now risk and uncertainty, so that's what we had till now. We had deterministic estimates for all parameters and so everything that we knew we were certain about. There are two other situations possible, risk and uncertainty. Risk is where we know that there is a probability distribution. We are not sure, but at least we know how likely things are to happen. But uncertainty we don't know. We just know that different outcomes are possible. We know that energy costs can go down. We know that energy costs can go up. We know that energy costs can remain the same, but we have no clue whatsoever about the likelihood of each of these situations. So put in a more strict language. So the probability are not known and for the identified states of nature and these states of nature is like I said, energy costs will go down, will stay the same, will go up. They're called state of nature because well, we have no influence on it. We don't know anything about it. As we will see, the Laplace criterion assumes that well, if you don't know, then just assume that each state is equally likely. But there are other approaches and these other approaches have to do with decision attitude, which can be very optimistic or very pessimistic or something in between. An advanced decision making modeling of decisions under uncertainty can be found in utility theory and game theory. They're used for policy making in government. They're used for supply chain management, partnership, establishment and deployment. Maybe, you know, the one of the basic examples, the prisoners dilemma. So there are two people in jail, the orange guy and the blue one. If they both confess, they will have a sentence of five years. If they both remain silent, they will have a sentence of one year. But if one of them confesses and the other remains silent, the one confessing will get out and the other one will have a 20 year sentence. So it's really a dilemma because as a decision maker, you really don't know what the other will be doing. So that makes it a little bit awkward to decide. Now, let's have a look at these approaches. So this is the matrix where we start from. We have the actions. So that's the choices that we have to make. For instance, investment alternative, they're numbered A1 over Ai to Am. We have the states of nature, theta j with j going from 1 to n. That's what can happen. We don't know anything about the chances. We can't influence anything. It's nature if you want that decides. And then, of course, we have consequences of our actions. If we take a given action and one of the states of nature actually happens, we will have an outcome. In an investment situation, it could be we will have a profit or we will have a loss. So that's the situation we have. Now, how do we take decisions? Well, these are the criteria that are mostly used. You see, the last one is the Laplace. In sufficient reason, Laplace says, well, if you don't know anything, then just assume that there are equal probabilities. And then you see the maxi min, the maxi max and the mini max. So Walt, Hurwitz and Savage. You see the formulas. On this slide, I have the explanation. But let's maybe I think it's easier if we have a look at the example in order to understand. So, OK, we have a simple example. It's chosen. It's a virtual example. It's chosen because it's illustrating a specific thing about these criteria, namely, if you look at these criteria, they all indicate in other action as being the most interesting one to do. OK, so then one could, of course, ask, well, does it make sense then to use these criteria? And the answer is yes, they have some advantages. One advantage is transparency. Transparency or consistency. You indicate why you chose the action that you chose. It's not like, well, if we don't know, I feel like A2 is a good action or A3 is an action. No, you explain what your reasoning behind it was. So that's consistency. And the second thing is that you can. And that's something we will also see in multi criteria decision making. You can include the decision makers attitude. And how can we do this? Well, we can do that by, for instance, going for if you don't know, take equal probabilities. If you don't know, assume the worst, be very pessimistic or, well, always look at the bright side, take an optimistic criteria. So these things bring transparency, they bring consistency, they allow you to bring in your own decision making attitudes. Now, OK, let's have a look at the example. So Laplace, as I told you, we will assume equal probabilities. So the expected outcome if we take action one will be one fourth of two plus two plus zero plus one is five over four. Here we have one fourth of one plus one plus one plus one, which is one, etc. And then we see that, well, the largest expected outcome is here. So we will pick action one. OK, let's go to wealth here, wealth maximum. What are we doing? Well, we are computing something called a security level. And what is the security level? Well, the security level is defined as under action I, what is the worst possible return or consequence that can occur for the decision maker? So we are going, we're looking if we take, for instance, action A, then what is the worst possible state of nature that could happen? And well, what would be the worst outcome? That's zero. Here it doesn't make any difference. Here, what is the worst thing that can happen? That's zero. What is the worst thing that can happen here? That's zero. So we have the security level. And then wealth is saying, well, pick the one with the highest security level. So that's why it's called a maximin. We are taking for computing the security level, we take a minimum. Then to pick our action, we take a max. So that's the maximin. OK, next is Hurwitz. Hurwitz is basically the basic Hurwitz is based on the optimism level. And what is the optimism level? Well, under action I, the optimism level is the best, not the worst, but the best possible return or consequence that can occur for the decision maker. So as you see here, we will pick the max. So here the max is two, the max is one, the max is four, the max is three. And we pick the one with the highest. So that is a three. There is a possibility to have a variation on that maxi max. And we use user preference and we will introduce a parameter alpha. And alpha will be used to obtain a weighted average of optimism and security level. Like here, if you look at this one. So we have alpha times zero plus one minus alpha times two. For the second action, we have alpha times one plus one minus alpha times one. Sorry. So we compute a weighted average in here. Well, it depends a little bit on the value for alpha that you set. But if you set alpha less than three over four, it still will be the A3S outcome. So here we are optimistic. Here we can make a mix according to our own attitudes, whether we want to be more optimistic or more pessimistic. And then the last is Savage. Savage is a minimax regret. It's a little bit more complicated to compute. What is the regret? Let's first focus on the regrets. The ones in green, I try to tear apart the different steps. So to make it more clear. So what is a regret? The regret is a difference between the value resulting from the best action. Given that that state of nature theta J is a true state of nature. And the value of the resulting from action AI under theta J. Let's have a look. So what do we do? Well, what we do is we have a look first here. We try to have for a given state of nature, this would be the best action. So let's underline. So that's what I did here. Or that you see here. The best possible if you have this one, the best possible would be two. If you have this state, the best possible would be four. If you have this state, the best possible would be one. If you have this state, the best possible one would be either one of those. What we then do is, so we have that. We need to compute our regret. So we have from this max, we have to subtract the, I would say the current one. So that means that here we will have, here we have two. So two minus two. Here we have two minus one, two minus zero, two minus one. Here four minus two, four minus one, four minus four, four minus three. You understand what is happening. Then from these numbers, we have to take the max. What is the max? So we will take a circle. So the maximum regret here is two, it's three. Here it's two and here we have one. And then we want to minimize the maximum regret. So then if you look here, the maximum regret is two, three, two, one. So this seems to be the most appropriate action. So it's not difficult, but it becomes a little bit messy. But that's what is decision making under uncertainty.