 The title of this chapter is Replacement and Retention Decisions. We are studying a specific type of investment problems, namely should we retain the current machine or should we replace it by a newer version. In this chapter we will not see new criteria to evaluate investments. We already saw the annual, present and future world. Last time we saw the rate of return. Here we will use the annual world, but for a specific type of problems. This is an overview, it's a rather short chapter. What we also want to do is this. If you google or you look in Science Direct and you look replacement problems, you will find a very specific type of model. Let's see whether these models are completely in line with what our engineering economy handbook says about replacement problems or not. Why would we consider replacing our current machine installation plant? Because it shows reduced performance, wear and tear. It's not so reliable anymore, it's not productive enough anymore. Operating costs, for instance energy consumption is increasing. There are different requirements. New production is needed, more accurate production is needed or the asset that we have is become... Well, we can't use it anymore if we want to be competitive because for instance the technology is not state of the art anymore. So we cannot be competitive if we stick with it. Here you see, we brought together some terminology. I think most of the terminology you know. Let me just point out the new things to you. We have our old installation that we are considering for replacement. Well, that old installation is called the defender asset. The one we want to replace it with is called the challenger. Definitely two mutually exclusive options. We will not keep the old one and buy a new one. So it's either one thing or another. Another thing that is important, the notion of economic service life. We will see it in more detail later on. But basically it's the number of years at which the lowest annual worth of costs occurs. We will encounter market value for the defender. That's a real current fair market value. So it's really what the market is willing to pay for it. It's not what you think that it could be or it's also not what your book value says. Very very important in this chapter is that we take the consultant's point of view. Basically what it means is that you take the point of view of an outsider. And that means that you also take into account that keeping the defender is costing money. Because you give up the opportunity to receive a possible cash flow from the current defender. So that's what is important. The defender also still has in our formulas an initial investment. But I think it will become more clear when we see some examples. So this is a case study about the Arkansas division of a company called ADM. Three years ago they purchased a ground leveling system for rice field preparation at a cost of 120,000. At the time they expected the service life to be 10 years and after that a salvage value of 25,000 could still be received. An annual operating cost of 30,000 was expected. The current account book value is 80,000. The system is deteriorating rapidly and they expected after three more years of use the salvage value could be 10,000. Annual operating costs are still expected to be the 30,000. Now a new system has appeared on the market. Value of 100,000 dollar. Trading value for the current system today is 70,000. The price for that new system goes up next week to 110,000. But the trading value for our old one is still 70,000. The engineer estimates that the system would have a useful life of 10 years and a salvage value of 20 after that. Annual operating costs are estimated to be 20,000. So a lot less than, a bit less of our current system. And a 70 market value appraisal of the current system was made today. Later on we will see that the timing of these estimates is important. So if no further analysis is made on the estimates, what are the correct values that we should use in our replacement study today? Ok, let's have a look. So this is the situation. Three years ago we bought this system, a ground leveling system. So this was the purchase price, the expected service life at the time was 10 years. Expected service value 25,000, annual operating cost 30,000. Now if you look today, its current book value is 80,000. We expect the life to be another three years. So if you see, well, three years ago it was 10 years so we would expect it to be seven years. But well, no, it's only three years. Expected salvage value, annual operating costs and market value appraisal. Ok, now what about the new system? Well, this is the data we obtained. Ok, now what is important for our replacement study? I see here a lot of numbers. Well, we have to take that consultant's view, outsider viewpoint. And then these are things that actually matter. What matters is our market value, current market value of the old system. Which we will be treating as an initial investment in our calculations. We have an annual operating cost, we have a salvage value and we have a life of three years. Here we have our initial investment, annual operating cost, salvage value and we have our life. What does it mean? It means that these things that you see that are, so here, maybe a bit confusing. So all these values are not important in our study anymore, in our replacement study. We don't need them, we are not interested in them anymore. So this is a summary of what we have been saying. So you must assign an investment cost for keeping the defender asset. That's the consequence of that consulting viewpoint that we take. We have to, a current marketplace value and of course the challenger. Well, it's just the numbers that we have for that new machine or equipment or whatever. That we want to replace.