 Here a complexity is added to our computation of taxable income. Namely we work with depreciation, recapture and capital gain. I think the easiest way to understand is to look at this figure. So we have here bottom line, 0. We have our first cost B, or our unadjusted basis B as we called it. And then we have a book value in year T. Now suppose that we are selling an asset, then we have three situations that can happen. Either the selling price is higher than our first cost, our selling price is between the first cost and the book value, or our selling price is lower than our book value. And these three situations give rise to three different values. If our selling price is lower than our book value, we are talking about a capital loss. If our selling price is somewhere between the first cost and our book value, we are talking about a depreciation recapture, sometimes called an order gain. And in the situation that we are very lucky, that we get more money than we initially paid, we are talking about a capital gain. So these are the three values that we have to take into account. So that means that our taxable income relation is updated and we add these amounts. Of course, we will see what impact it has. Obviously in a situation you cannot have at the same time a capital loss and a net capital gain. So we will have just an example. So it might seem complicated, but in fact it's not. So we are talking about a laser based system that was installed three years ago for a B value of 150,000. And we can sell it now for 180,000. Based on a five-year macros recovery, the book value currently is 43,200. The gross income for this year is an 800,000 and annual operating expenses are 50,000. So we are asked to determine the taxable income and then the taxes if we have a tax rate of 34%. So if we sell the system now. So let's see what we have. So we have the situation in here. So this is zero. Our book value is 43,200. And our B value was 150,000. And our selling price is 180,000. So what do we have? Well we have a depreciation recapture. And we have a capital gain. So that means that we will have to add that to our taxable income formula. So we have our 800,000 for our gross income. We have our 50,000 for our operating expenses. We have our 28,000 for our depreciation. And we have our depreciation recapture and capital gain. And that gives us a taxable income of 858,000 times our tax rate. That gives us 290,720. And what you see here. Well if you would not have sold the item or the asset now. We would have a different taxable income. Because we would not have had that depreciation, recovery and capital gain. Now an after tax evaluation. Well this is a full slide. But in fact what it's saying is. Well just act the same way as you would do. As you did with the before taxes. The guidelines are still the same. For instance present word. If it's positive. Well it's a viable project. If you have more than one. And they are mutually exclusive. Then the one with the highest or the best present word value will win. We also still have that equal in terms of present word comparison. We still have that equal service requirement. Also for the ROAR we still have the same things. That the ROAR should be better than the after tax more. And also that the best one we need that incremental analysis. So not a lot of new things. We can estimate the after tax ROAR. And here you see a simple numerical example. So we have the values given here. For P, for GI minus OE. For N, for D, for TE. And if we set up the annual word analysis before the present word relationship. For our I star, our ROAR. We get a before tax one of 28.65%. After ROAR we would say well this is this. And we multiply it by times one minus the tax rate. And it's giving us 17.19. Now if you do the analysis again after tax you would end up with 18.03. So estimation is in most cases relatively good. But of course it's not an exact thing. An after tax analysis. Example, so we have our B value to an adjusted basis. We have a salvage value of zero. We have a lifetime of five years. And per year we have a revenue, we have our operating expenses and we have a depreciation. And we have an effective tax rate of 0.184. Before taxes we have our revenue, we have our expenses, we have our base value, we have our salvage value which is zero. So we can compute the cash flow before taxes. And we can, based on this cash flow series, we can determine our rate of return. Okay, let's do it for the after taxes. We have our depreciation that comes into play. Taxable income. And the taxable income is then based on those two values plus of course our depreciation. We have our tax rates and we can compute our cash flow after taxes. If we have a look at this cash flow series we can again determine the ROAR. And if we would have used an approximation, so we would have gone from here to there. We would have our tax rate, we would have had 35% instead of the 36%. So here in this case you could argue that this is a lot of work for a very close internal rate of return difference. Before and after tax replacement study. I would definitely urge you to have a very close look at it. Also in the workshops there is an example on a before and after tax replacement study for a company called Apple Crisp. Have a look at it because this is a very complete exercise in the sense that most of the elements that we have been talking about before are coming back here. So if you can solve an exercise like that you are good for the exam. What are we talking about here? So we are talking about Mid-continent Power Authority. They purchased emission control equipment three years ago for 600,000. They would like to replace this old equipment by a newer one and the market value for the old currently used equipment is 400,000. Effective tax rate is 34%. And a simple straight line depreciation with a salvage value of 0 can be used. So when they are asking to perform a before tax replacement analysis with a MAR of 10% and B perform an after tax replacement analysis with a MAR of 7%. You have this nice analysis. So before taxes it seems that the defender is the most interesting one to keep and after taxes we see that apparently this is still the same. Let's have a closer look. Maybe I added some slides compared to what you have in your binder to make it a little bit easier. So these are the values we have to work with. We have our current market value for the defender of 400,000. The first cost was 600,000. Annual cost is 100,000 and the challenger cost is costing us now 1 million but its annual cost is rather low. So for our defender. Well it was originally meant to last for 8 years but it is already 3 years ago that we bought it. So we have 5 more years left. We have our expenses. We have our market value. Remember replacement analysis is the consultant approach. And here our consultant view. We have 0 for our salvage value. So that means that our cash flow before taxes is 400,000 respectively 100,000. And if you want to know what the annual worth is. Well I think you are quite good at it by now. So now we have our initial amount and then we have our 100,000 annual worth. And we come with the 205,520. And in a similar way we do it for our challenger and apparently that is not so interesting. So I think this is quite a straightforward replacement exercise. Now here for our after taxes. I try to make it a little bit more understandable by adding some numbers. The 1,2,3,4,5 things. Okay let's have a look. Well data of course is still the same. So if we have to do an after tax analysis we need our depreciation. Important is that the depreciation is based on the initial recovery period of 8 years. So don't make the mistake of saying well I am looking at 5 years. So I will divide the 600,000 by 5 to find my depreciation. It is a mistake that is often made. Okay so we have our amount of depreciation. We have our taxable income. Then we have our taxes which are tax rate times. Taxable income. We have our cash flow after taxes. And for that cash flow after taxes we can compute our annual worth. I think that is pretty straightforward. For the challenger we work in a similar way. So we compute our depreciation. Here in this case 5 years for 1 million. That means that we have 200,000. Now here maybe the taxable income. Well taxable income. The 215,000 is operating expenses and depreciation. But here this is special. Here we have a depreciation recapture. We are selling the old equipment. And that means that we have in this case the selling price is slightly above the book value. The selling price they give us. The book value we have to compute. It is 3 years old. So we have 600,000 minus 3 years at 75,000. So we have that is the book value. And that means that we have a depreciation recapture of 25,000. Again we compute the taxes. And again we have our cash flow after taxes. And again we are computing the annual worth. So there it is getting pretty straight forward again. So here this is one of the things that is a little bit difficult here. And also here it is a bit tricky. So I think that makes this exercise clearer. Well it is as for most of the problems you have to solve for this course. It is not difficult but you have to work carefully step by step and then nothing can go wrong. This is something we will not discuss further. It has to do with economic added value. Which basically is about the fact that people are willing to pay more. If a manufacturing company for instance has done something with components. Like the example they give is that consumers are willing to pay more for fries as for raw potatoes. I mean the value added is an economic value. Same would be lumber or making wooden tables of it. But something that we will not go to pursue further. Okay exercises will come next.