 Decision trees. When do we use decision trees? Well one thing which is certain, we use decision trees if we have a risk situation. And we will work with probability estimations for the outcomes and the measure of words, our present word that we had before will become an expected value. So the expected present word. And another thing which is typical for decision trees is that we work with more than one stage. So we have to make a decision and then at the next stage we will have to make another decision. This is a part of a decision tree. There are two different nodes possible in decision trees. By the way I think most of you have encountered decision trees before. But let me explain again. So there is a decision node. So you, decision maker, take a decision or alternative weights you can go. And then something happens. Nature, again nature takes a decision. But it's not like nature takes a decision. I don't know what. So you know what the probabilities are, you know that there are different outcomes and you know what the probabilities for these different outcomes are. And then you take it as well that you have to take. And we talk about stage decisions. Here we have to take another decision. And we have alternatives and again nature will decide and we can have different outcomes. Here again same thing here, similar. So that's a decision tree. And what we will do, we will try to solve the decision tree in order to decide what is the best course of action. Let's have a look at this example. So with this case we are with Jerry and Jerry is the CEO of a food processing company. And recently he was approached by a supermarket chain that wants to market its frozen dinners. And their offer forces Jerry to make two decisions. One decision now and one decision within two years. The current decision that he has to take is either to lease a factory or to own one. Now there are possibilities of course, there are probabilities. We don't know if it will be success. So here, well market can be favorable or not. Same here. If, well we are in the lease option, we have to make a decision. And then the decision is if we have a good outcome we will have to decide whether or not to expand our facility. Might times two, times one or maybe half it. And here if it's not favorable we can downsize our activities or we can just stop and go out of business. If we decide to own the facility, again it can be good or it can be bad, we will take another decision here. Whether we want to quadruple our activity or just double it, stay the same or stop. Again we can have a good or bad outcome but we know these probabilities. That's an important thing. Okay, but maybe, I hope it's clear but let's have a look at another example maybe. That will make things even more clearer. Here, this example I will explain step by step how decision tree is built and how it's solved. I added a few slides with the steps in order to make things more clear. What is it about? Well we need to make a decision about either marketing or selling a new invention. So you see, market, sell. If the product is marketed, a next decision is to take it international or stay national. And the outcome of the branch is result in this decision tree. Probabilities are given and the question is determine the best choice. Now let's take it step by step. Important in decision trees is that we build it from the left to the right and we will solve it from the right to the left. Step by step, so we have to decide either we are building the tree now, we have to decide whether we market or sell. Then out of our hands but if we sell well it's over for us but if we decide to market it we can have either a favorable or an unfavorable outcome. We will have to make a next decision which can be either to go international or to stay national. We know that there is a 20% probability here that market outcome will be favorable and 80% that it will be low. We take another decision, go international or go national and we have the probabilities what will happen. If we go international and we are in this situation, these are the probabilities. We have a probability of 50% of having this present word or cash flow before taxes and 50% chance to have this outcome. And here we will have these probabilities each time with the outcome and here again we have probabilities and outcome. Of course, and also here we have a possible outcome but here we are sure that we will have this 9. Now we are done with building the tree, now we have to start solving it. And how do we solve it? Well the first step that we take is this one, so we start here. So in this particular point if we go that direction we will have 14 and 14 is 0.5 times 12 plus 0.5 times 16 is 6 plus 8 is 14. In a similar way we compute this 0.2 and here similar way we compute this. And we see that if we have to take a decision here then apparently the most favorable one is to go international and here as well we go international. Brings us to the next step. Ok, well here is the computations. So we will go for 14 and we will go for 4.2. We have to move on. Now we have to decide, well we have this situation so we have to decide there. And here the 6.16, how do we come to 6.16? Well it's 0.2 times 14 plus 0.8 times 4.2, 6.16. So if we go this way we have an expected present word of 6.16. If we go that way we have an expected outcome of 9. So it would be wise here to take the decision and to sell. So that's how it works. We will see some examples in the workshops. I will have a larger exercise at the end of this chapter. So that's how decision trees work. So it's not that complicated. You have to carefully build your decision tree and then carefully make the computations. Ok, now decision trees are not only interesting to visualize these stage decisions. We can also use them for informational analysis. We can use them to obtain some more insights in the situation. And there are three things that we can compute. We can compute the value of control, we can compute the value of perfect information and the value of imperfect information. Basically the value means, well what would you be willing to suppose that somebody can offer you a perfect forecast. What would you be willing to pay for that? Or suppose that that forecast is not 100% accurate but only 80% accurate. Then what would you be willing to pay for that? And the value of control, suppose that you have control over nature, then what would you do? Ok, sounds maybe a little bit strange but it's something that is often used. So here you have the definitions. As I said, value of perfect information, expected value if you had perfect information, minus expected value without perfect information. Ok, and this is similar for imperfect and value of control but let's have a look at an example. Let's have a look at an example. It will not only show how we compute value of perfect information, value of imperfect information and value of control. But it also introduces a concept which is called influence diagram. And the influence diagram is often used to visualize the decision situation for making decisions. What are the components? The components are, well we have a value model which is here, the net benefit. And the net benefit here, it's the crop value minus frost protection cost, let me first explain. It's about an orange grower and the orange grower can either decide to buy and install protection against frost or not. Frost can or cannot occur overnight and if there is frost, obviously that will have an impact on the quality of the oranges. Ok, now we have, this is our value model, the net benefit and this is the decision we have to take. Whether or not we will buy and install that frost protection, obviously that is costing money. So that frost protection will have an influence on the crop value, it will have an influence on of course the frost protection cost, buy or not. And the crop value is not only determined here by our frost protection, we are sure if we buy it what will be the value when we have frost. But what we don't know is whether we will have frost or not. So this is what an influence diagram is like, so it helps to analyze and structure the decision problem. We will see another example in the case study. Ok, now let's build the tree. So if we know that frost protection cost is 25, euros, dollars, whatever, value of undamaged cost is 100, value of crop if we have frost but we have frost protection will be 75, if there is frost and we have no frost protection everything will be lost. And we know from historical data on the weather that the probability of having frost is 0.4 and the probability of having no frost is 0.6. So we start building our tree like we did before, the decision is to have frost protection or not. And then nature decides whether we will have frost or not. Nature decides. We know these probabilities, 0.4, 0.6, 0.4, 0.6. Now we have to compute these values. So we say what is the value? Well here we are in a situation where we have frost protection. Ok, that means that we have bought at frost protection. Frost protection which is costing 25. But we also know that our crop will be protected so we will have this 75. So 75 minus 25 is 50. And in a similar way we compute these outcomes. So now we have built the tree, now we have to solve it. So we start from the right to the left here. If we go that way we have 0.4 times 50. That way we have 0.6 times 75 is 65. So we have 65 here. Here, well 0.4 times 0 plus 0.6 times 100 is 60. This is higher, so the expected value is higher. So recommendation is invest in frost protection. Now here we see the value of control. The value of control is well we are capable of influencing the weather. So we will choose to have no frost. And then still we can buy to have frost protection. Frost protection but there is no frost. That means that still we will have 75. No frost protection and no frost we will have 100 because we will not have spent any money. So it seems that if we could control the weather then it would be, well we could go. We would go that way. If there is no frost we would not install frost protection. This is what our previous tree was telling us. This is what this is telling us. So that means that if we would be able to control the weather we would be willing to pay 35 euros for it. Now the value of perfect information. The value of perfect information. Look we have a change in our influence diagram. We will have a different tree structure. So what do we have? We have perfect information. So we still have, we know what will happen. Of course these probabilities remain 0.4 and 0.6 as we cannot influence nature here. But if we have frost, investing in frost protection would result in the net benefit of 50. If there is frost and we have no frost protection we would have zero benefit. And in case of no frost we have 75 and 100. So here in this case we would have 100. If we know that we have perfect information. And here if we knew that there was no frost we would do this. If we knew that there was frost we would go for this option. So we would have here an expected value of 50. And then here, well similar way, we have 0.4 times 50 plus 0.6 times 100 is 80. So our previous tree, what we have now. So we would be willing to pay 15 for perfect information. So it's interesting, suppose that somebody is offering you that information and is saying well I charge you 10 for it. You should definitely do so. If somebody is offering that information and is saying I'm charging you 30 for it. You should not do it because that information is not that valuable. Now of course if we have perfect information we can also have a situation of imperfect information. Here we introduce a new variable in our decision tree. And the new variable in our decision tree is the forecast. Before we can solve our decision tree we have to transform it. So this is nature's probability tree. So we have 40% and 60%. Now if we have here the quotes it means the forecast. And we have a forecast that is 80% correct. So that means that if there is actually frost our forecast will have set frost with 80% probability. And 20% probability that it will have set no frost. If there is no frost our forecasting model will have told us frost 20% or will have correctly mentioned no frost with 80%. So 0.4 times 0.8 is 0.32, 0.4 times 0.2 is 0.08. Now what we have to do is of course since we are talking about having information we will have to transform that tree. So we will have to transform it in the decision maker's probability tree. And here we start in the tree with the forecast that is saying us frost or no frost. And we have 0.44 because that's the sum of the here frost frost. So the 0.12 and the 0.32. And here the no frost is then the sum of this one and this one. And we have to deal with posterior probabilities. And I think you all know that is using the rules of Bayes. And okay once we have these probabilities we can put them in our tree. And we can work in a similar way as we did before. And go from the right to the left. And here we have the value of imperfect information is 8.13 which is of course lower than the value of perfect information. Important to note here is that you have to adjust your initial tree because the situation is different for value of control, value of perfect, value of imperfect information. And interesting to notice is also here that we can visualize the change decision situation by adjusting our influence diagram. So that influence diagram is quite powerful. Maybe you find this situation still rather simple but if the situation gets a little bit more complex it's quite interesting to have an influence diagram. We will see another example in the case study.