 This will be a very short chapter because we have been talking about break-even before. We have been talking about payback before, so just very briefly we will go over it again. We will talk about the single project, we will talk about two or three alternatives. We will not talk about the Excel solver. Previous encounters with break-even. This was the very first example here. It was in the first lecture where we were talking about organizing a conference. There was a fixed cost. There were two options. Luxury conference, a more simple one. Each had a fixed cost, each had a variable cost. These were the revenues and in each case we could look at what the break-even point was. In the rate of return analysis chapter we saw a break-even interest rate. In the replacement analysis we were talking about a minimum market value as a break-even analysis. Here we will revisit the payback period. We have seen the payback period before, remember, when we talked about one of the first chapters on the annual word, present word and future word. What is a break-even analysis? Basically we want to determine a value that makes two options or two elements equal. I'm sorry but this is of course two examples we were given in the previous slide. If we are talking about a single project or choice that we have to make, we think of the... A typical example is a cost-revenue model like the one we had for the conference. What we have is a total cost which is composed of two components, a fixed cost and a variable cost. We have the profit or revenue minus the total cost. This profit can also be negative of course if our total cost is larger than our revenue. Fixed costs, we discussed them before, they do not vary with the production level or activity. For instance the cost of a building or a fixed overhead. Variable costs, they do change with production volume. The more we produce, the higher these costs will be. Think of a car, if you produce cars we need wheels, every car needs four wheels. The more cars we make, the more wheels we will need. The relationship can be linear or can be non-linear. If it's not non-linear, it can be economies of scale. Meaning that variable costs are going up... Sorry, I'm showing it on the revenue thing which is definitely not okay. Variable costs can be non-linear, like here, sorry. Which means that we have economies of scale, we could have a situation which we have variable costs like this. Where we have these economies of scale. The breakeven point is then the point where in this case revenue and total costs are intersecting. So if you look at this example, this is the breakeven point. And we could do some sensitivity analysis and say, well this is the variable cost. Suppose that we can bring it down to this, then where would our breakeven point be? So in a sense we are doing sensitivity analysis there. Of course we can have non-linear relationships and then we can have more than two breakeven points. By the way, breakeven analysis is usually a bit too simplified for real decision making. But it can be really useful to provide some basic insights. Very simple example, so we have a plant producing 15,000 units per month. And we are asked to find the breakeven level with the following data. Fixed cost of 75,000 per month, revenue of 8 dollars per unit and a variable cost of 2.5 per unit. And we are also expected to find the expected monthly profit and loss. Well, let's focus on this equation. This is the profit equation, revenue minus total cost. Revenue per unit, number of units, fixed cost, variable cost times the number of units. And if we fill out the data we find a profit of 7,500. By putting the profit to zero we can find an equation to find our breakeven volume. We could have known that if we would have done this first we would have 13,000. Compared to the 15,000 we would have known already that we would have a profit to expect and not a loss. Case of Lufkin Trailer Corporation. So it's a company that is assembling trailers per month, 30 trailers per month in one of its facilities. Over the last five months production dropped to 25 units per month because of the market that had a dip. Data on fixed cost, revenue, variable cost or given. We are asked to answer three questions. To compare the current production level of 25 units per month with the current breakeven point. To calculate the current profit and then to see what is the difference if the fixed cost remains constant. What is the difference needed between revenue and variable cost to breakeven at the production level of 15 units. So basically this is nothing new, it's very similar to the previous one. Again, well we have this equation to compute our breakeven. Here we can compute our profit and if we use in this equation we fill out a Q of 15. We can find what they ask for, the difference between the R and the V being the revenue and the variable cost per unit. So again pretty straightforward.