 Okay, there are two approaches in performing a replacement study. First one is when no study period is specified, the second one is when a study period is specified. Let's take them one by one. So no study period specified, you see, well it's the left branch of our tree that we also had on the previous slide. And here you see the procedure. So basically we start with calculating the annual worth. We look when the economic service life is reached and we select the lower annual worth. If that was the challenger, it's easy. We just replace the defender by the challenger. If the defender is selected, we will keep him for one year and then repeat the analysis. Why is that? Well it has to do with estimates. We're working with estimates and usually our estimates are not so accurate if we go further and further in the future. So we will repeat that analysis every year. Okay, now an example. So we have an example. It's a rather long story. There's a lot of information which is nice to know but not need to know. So basically it's about a company Toshiba Electronics that invested in a new assembly line two years ago and they purchased approximately 200 units at 70,000 each and installed them in different countries and then we get quite some explanation about what the equipment is about. Now this year, that's important for our study, new industrial standards will require 60,000 retrofit for each of the units. That's an extra cost so it's not included in the expected operating costs that they had so far. Also a new system is available. It can be considered as a challenger to the old system. Now the data you find there. Now for challenger and defender. And the chief engineer asks for a replacement study to be performed this year and each year in the future if needed. Interest rate considered is 10%. So step that we want to take is first we need to compute economic service life. We have to see whether we keep the defender or we will go for a challenger and then we will do a follow-up analysis after one year and also there we have the data which are outlined in C. So this is the data summarized. For the first part you see, well I wrote them out for you to the left and you see the table to the right. What you see also in the right table is that they already computed the total annual worth and expected, sorry, I'm making the mistake myself, the economic service life here is four years, here it's three years. How do we compute this total annual worth? Well exactly the same way as was done before. In the examples, well for your convenience I included this, it's handwritten but still I think it can be helpful if you want to check whether you are capable of doing these computations or not. I made the computations for year four for the challenger here and for year two for the defender. So I'm quite sure that you can do it. Now here we are back to what the book is saying. So it's a summary and they say well we see that it's four years with an annual worth of costs of minus 19,000 for the challenger and for the defender we have minus 17,000. And three years so we will go for the defender. We expect now, I expect to keep it for three more years but we have to perform a one year later analysis and indeed if we have read the data and to see we see that some numbers have changed and if we redo the analysis we see that, you see it here in the box, that the numbers have indeed changed that now it seems to be that the challenger is more interesting So we will replace the defender at that moment. So last year so to speak we were expecting to keep the defender for three years but with the analysis one year later we decided that that was not wise to keep it for another two years but we would replace it by the challenger immediately. Some notes, we will see an example of that later on. We could do a break even analysis for instance on the market value. We could say what is the market value of the defender that will make the current challenger economically attractive and what is the trade in value. We could do a break even analysis there. Also important here is that these cost estimates are quite important because if these estimates change our decision can change. So that's what this is saying. So that means that here the analyst and the engineer comes in, needs to be capable of making an estimate as accurate as possible and not hesitate to change the estimates if necessary. Now with the specified study period, we have a slightly different approach. This is the example of Chicago's airport. It's about the purchase of a new fire truck. This fire truck is needed because an increase in firefighting capacity is needed. Options are to buy an additional truck of the same capacity or to buy a new double capacity truck to replace the current one. Estimates are summarized in the table. And the question asked is to perform a replacement analysis considering a study period of 12 years and considering a study period of 9 years. So let's have a look. Again nothing very new. If we say a study period of 12 years we write down the equations for 12 years. We write down the equation for the defender. We write down the equation for the challenger. Defender in this case is the presently owned one plus the augmentation. The challenger is the double capacity truck. Is there a difference between the 12 year study period and the 9 year study period? Not really, it's just the number of years that you consider. Then we can have another conclusion. Another conclusion here we go for the double capacity truck and also here we go for the double capacity truck. So these computations are a little bit shorter when we have a study period given to us than in case we have no study period specified.