 This short chapter introduces us to budget limitations for independent projects. As you know, we've usually worked with mutual exclusive projects, so if you take one, the other project is not possible. With independent projects, that's not the case. We can take as many as we want, as long as they have a positive present word or their rate of return is higher than the MAR. Of course we can take them all, provided that there is money. That's what we will talk about in this chapter, the budget limitation. Now, capital rationing. Capital is a scarce resource, so we might be willing to do all projects that are interesting in the sense that they have that positive present word or that rate of return higher than the MAR, but we might not be able to do that because of our budget limitation. What we can do, maybe we can do two of them or three of them or four of them, so let's find out how we can see which projects that we want to do. The approach taken in the book is to create bundles, and bundles are collections of independent projects that are mutually exclusive. If you have three projects, we have two to the power three bundles possible. As you see, for three projects A, B and C, we have the bundles A, B and C, combination A, B, A, C, B, C, A, B, C or do nothing. Important to notice is that projects are selected either entirely or not selected at all. You come to half a project. Budget limit is restricting the total investment allowed, and projects are usually quite different from each other, have different lives. So it's not like in the mutual exclusive that I want to buy a machine and there are four different suppliers that deliver similar machines. Now we can have quite different projects and we have the reinvestment assumption that positive cash flows or reinvested at the MAR until the end of life of the long-slift project. So our objective of capital budgeting can be formulated as maximizing the return on project investments using a specific measure of work, and usually we go for the present work. And then of course we can have two types of situations. One where we work with equal life projects or unequal life projects. In capital budgeting, we don't need to use the least common multiple, so we can just use the present work over the life of each of the independent projects. We use the same procedure as for equal life, which is that we make bundles. We compute the present work of all bundles. If the present work is less than zero, we discard that bundle. We just keep the ones which have a positive present work and we select the one with the largest one. Let's have a look at an example. So we have three projects with initial investment respectively being 25,000, 20,000 and 50,000. We know the annual net cash flow is positive for all projects. Their life is four years and the salvage value is given there. Only A and C have a positive salvage value. The interest rate to use is 15% and we know that we have a budget limitation of 70,000. We know that with three projects we have a possibility of creating eight bundles. But we cannot accept those five bundles in our further analysis because we have that budget restriction of 70,000. So for instance, we cannot combine A, B and C because that would be too expensive. Also, we cannot have A and C together because it would be too expensive. So for the bundles that are remaining, we compute the present work and we pick the bundle with the highest present work, which is here bundle B, C. Here we have another example. So we have four projects each with their initial investment, their annual net cash flow and their project life years. We have a first look at our bundles. So here now we have two to four 16 bundles, but they are not all feasible because of budget restrictions. So we stick to the eight that are feasible. We compute the present work. We have to discard three because or two, sorry, because I have a negative present work. And then we take the one with the highest present work, which is the bundle A, C. So we will select project A and C. So far we have been working with the number of bundles. But if you have many, many projects, that number of bundles becomes very large and it cannot be handled manually anymore. So then we use linear programming and more specifically, zero one integer linear programming. I think most of you have encountered linear programming in other courses. How we use it here? Well, we say we want to optimize the maximum or well, the objective is to maximize the sum of present words of the net cash flows at MAR for projects. And we have, of course, constraint that is that the sum of investments should be less than the invested capital. And of course, each project needs to be either selected or not selected. It cannot be selected half. So you see the formulation. So we maximize the sum of present words. If, well, we try to do as many projects as possible, provided that we remain within budget. Let's have a look at the numerical example. So we have four, the four projects with the present word. Let's label A with one, B with two, C with three and D with four. Then we get our maximize our objective function, maximize six thousand six hundred forty six X one minus one thousand nineteen X two plus nine hundred eighty four times X three minus seven hundred and forty eight times X four. And have a look at the initial investment. We have a budget constraint eight thousand X one plus fifteen thousand X two plus eight thousand X three plus eight thousand X four is less than twenty thousand. This is something we can easily solve by any linear programming solver being an add-in for Excel or MATLAB program or specialized software. Now, there can be a drawback to this zero one formulation that is that also the computational time for this type of problems can be quite high and even very high if we have a large number of projects. And then sometimes people go for an alternative. They go for a greedy heuristic. I think you know what a heuristic is. A heuristic is an algorithm that usually works very well, but we are not sure that it's perfect. It's a heuristic. It's like it's not a rule of thumb, but it's more like a real algorithm I would say. What can we do? Well, we can use a knapsack heuristic. That's a greedy heuristic, a myopic heuristic, and we will rank our alternatives based on, for instance, the profitability index. A profitability index being, we saw it before, we saw the sum of the present worth of all cash flows divided by the initial cost. And so then we will rank them from high to low and we will start filling our knapsack and the capacity of our knapsack. That's our starting budget, our constraint. And once we have met the volume available in our knapsack, we stop. So we will select those projects. Why is it a greedy one? Why do I say that it's myopic? Because, well, we rank them and we go from the best ranked to the worst ranked, but we do not take any further consideration. So maybe if we stop after five projects, because the sixth project does not fit in our knapsack anymore, we don't look any further. We don't look whether maybe the seventh project is still, we can still fit in the knapsack. So it's a greedy heuristic. It has the big advantage that it's working quite fast and it's easy to implement. In Excel you can easily implement it. Now, talking about these ranking measures, you can, of course, rank anyway you want. I suggested to use the profitability index using the present worth. So here it's called the present worth index. We could use an internal rate of return. We could use the simple present worth. Everything is possible. But we have to make sure that I think that the present worth index is a good one because it's a relative ratio, which is looking at what you get out of it over what you put in it. But nothing is holding you back to use another ranking. Be aware, however, that if you use another ranking, you will have possibly another solution to your problem because they are each maximizing different things. So be careful there. Okay, this was the end of the very short chapter on capital budgeting for independent projects.