 In the handbook the chapter on project financing also includes non-economic attributes but we already covered that when we talked about cost benefit analysis. Let's have a look at two things. The cost of capital and the MAR. We will not go into detail on debt or equity at all. Not because they are not important, it's very interesting but to my feeling it's a bit out of scope of our engineering economy course. So we already met the cost of capital. The cost of capital is the weighted average interest rate based on debt and equity sources. So the WAC, the weighted cost of capital. And debt capital is the capital that we borrow outside the company. Equity is our own funds and returned earnings. We already discussed the MAR, minimum deductive rate of return. And we pointed out that that MAR takes into account the cost of capital. It should definitely be higher. In the example that you see there, the cost of capital is 8%. Then we definitely expect more. We will not be happy if the return of a project would be lower than that. So this is a very important slide. To the right you see again the weighted average cost of capital. And then to the left our MAR. We already spoke about the MAR a few times. We pointed out that the MAR cannot be found somewhere in literature or in the internet or in handbooks. But that the MAR is something that the company is deciding for themselves. And now what are the factors affecting the MAR? Project risks. The higher the perceived risk, the higher the MAR will be set. Investment opportunities. If a company sees investment opportunities, maybe market opportunities, they could lower the MAR temporarily. Government interventions can cause companies to raise or lower the MAR. Government interventions like tariffs, subsidies, etc. Also the tax structure has an impact. If corporate tax rates are rising, then also the MAR will be higher. Limited capital. As we have less and less capital, the MAR will increase. And also competition. Stronger or not competition at all. Or lowered competition can cause companies to raise or lower the MAR. So these are a few important factors that are affecting the MAR. And I expect you to know about them. An example of a WAC calculation. Weight at average cost of capital. We already saw a similar example earlier on in the course. So here we are having a case study about a company that is specializing in producing cold weather clothing and accessories. And it's expanding its ski jacket and wood stock manufacturing facilities. It plans to borrow 2.5 million at 7% interest. Issue stock worth of 4 million worth at 5.9%. And use 1.5 million of retained earnings at 5.1% to finance the project. Then the question is, determine the company's WAC. Well we know that the total project cost is 4 plus 1.5 plus 2.5 is 8 million. Then if we see the 5.9% will be used for 4 million. So that's half of it. So 4 divided by 8 times 5.9 is our first term. Then 1.5 over 8 we have at the 5.1%. And then the remaining 2.5 of the 8 will be financed at 7%. So that brings our WAC to 6.09. We will not talk about debt capital and equity capital as I consider it. As I already mentioned. To be outside of the scope maybe just one word of advice that a good balance between debt and equity funding is to be recommended.