 Okay, let's start talking about the public sector. We will focus on monetary criteria only. What are the differences between public and private sector projects? Well, I summarized some main differences in this table. Usually public sector projects are larger. They have a longer life, several decades or no exception. While in the private sector we usually have shorter project lives like 2 years, maybe 5 or 10 years, 25 years is already exceptional. Public sector, we are not talking about profits, we will be talking about cost benefits and disbenefits. While in the private sector we have revenues and costs. Funding system is different, interest rate is usually lower in the public sector than in the private sector. Public sector is more inclined to use multi-criteria analysis than the private sector. Private sector is primarily economically concerned, commercial organizations. While in the public sector politics might play a role. In between the public and private sector we have public-private partnerships. What are public sector projects? Well, you see here a number of examples. Building hospitals and clinics, parks, utilities, schools, economic development, convention centers, public housing, emergency relief, transportation and so on. I talked about cost benefits and disbenefits. While costs, that's everything that the government entity has to pay for construction and operations and maintenance of the project. The benefits is what the owners, the public are experiencing. And disbenefits, well it's also something that the public experiences. Usually it's another group. It's an undesirable, unplanned, negative consequence of the project. An example could be of a disbenefit if you build a home. It could have disbenefits for your neighbors. You do not plan that of course. But it's not to be avoided that there will be some noise, that there will be trucks driving up and down. So it will be a nuisance for your neighbors. Having these different parties also means that we will have to tell beforehand from which viewpoint that we will do the cost benefit analysis. Another example in the grey frame. A flood control project will have a first cost of 1.4 million with an annual maintenance cost of 40,000 and a 10 year life. Reduced flood damage is expected to amount to 175,000 per year. Loss income to farmers is estimated to be 25,000 per year. So at an interest rate of 6% should the project be undertaken. So that lost income to the farmers definitely is not planned. It's not as if we don't want that. But it's there. It's unavoidable. Of course often, and that happens more and more, the public sector government is working together with private contractors. And there are different formulas to do so. If the contractors do not share project risk, they are either paid on a fixed price basis or on a cost reimbursable basis. More and more we see the PPP where contractors share in project risks. It's the public private partnerships with typical design, build or design, build, operate, maintain, finance projects. It's a very interesting topic, but it's a bit out of scope for this course. Important also, the public sector, of course, companies need to behave ethically. But ethics are even more important maybe for the government. The government is making choices with their project. It's always aimed at a target group. They have to make sure that they are fair, that they do not forget minorities, for instance. So they have to be fair to the whole community. They have to think about the time impact. Maybe it's looking good for the moment financially speaking, but future generations will have to pay a lot of money in order to keep up the project. Should we only look at money? Maybe we should look at environmental impact, for instance. So these considerations are pretty important. By the way, we already briefly mentioned ethics, but then more company ethics in the first chapter. A public sector example. So we're dealing with a project where the intended investment is a purchase of land, more specifically green-built flood plain land, in order to preserve low-laying green areas in wildlife habitat east of the city of Dundee. Not everybody is happy with the project. For instance, developers oppose because the project will decrease the amount of available land for commercial development. The city engineer and the economic development director have collected some data. Obviously, at this stage, there are only rough estimates. In the table, you find a list of these estimates. The horizon they are thinking of is, as you can see in the table, 15 years. And the question is to identify the three different viewpoints and for each of those to label the estimates as cost benefits or disbenefits. So I summarized it in this table. What you find in this column is what is given in the table. What are the points of view that we need to take into account? We need to take into account the citizen, the city, the city budget, economic development. So what are the objectives of these stakeholder groups? Well, the citizen wants to maximize quality and wellness of themselves, their family, their neighborhoods. The city budget. The city budget. Well, it's important to have a balanced budget and to have a sufficient budget for the rapidly growing city services and economic development has to promote or wants to promote industrial and commercial development. So and then, well, here you see doesn't matter the costs or costs. Here we have benefits. Also similar. But here we have some some disagreements, for instance, the annual loss commercially is a disadvantage for the city and the city budget, but is considered a cost for the economic development. And while the loss of sales tax rebates is a disadvantage for the citizen, but is a cost for the city budget and economic development. So what is the lesson learned here? The lesson learned here is that before you start doing your cost benefit analysis, you should pick a stakeholder and say, I'm going to do the analysis here because the definition of cost benefit, this benefit, not the definition, but the classification you make of the different cost elements and benefit elements can be different according to the point of view that you're taking. And here the point of view can be the citizen, the city or the economic development. Now benefit cost analysis. Well, we have a benefit cost ratio. Basically, it is the present word or the annual word or the future word. And we have benefits over costs. Pretty straightforward. Now. There's one thing you should realize that is that there are different definitions and the conventional definition is to put. The ratio benefit cost as the benefits minus the disbenefits over the costs. There's also a modified one. And here we have the benefits minus the disbenefits minus the maintenance operating costs over the initial cost. So there are two different definitions. Is one better than the other? I wouldn't say yes or no. You just have to be careful what is asked for or what you find in papers. Maybe you note the benefit cost ratio. I am sure that we briefly mentioned it when we talked about the criteria. In fact, it's like the profitability index. This formula is the present word. In fact, we have our initial cost and then we have the other cash flows, the future cash flows. And we want the present word to be larger than zero. Or we could say that we make a ratio of it and we say that it should be larger than one. And in fact, this is our benefit cost ratio. OK, so it's not something entirely new. OK, let's have a look at the example for a single project. So the Ford Foundation expects to award 15 million in grants to public high schools to improve teaching and engineering related subjects. So that's initial investment, the cost. These grants will extend over a period of 10 years. An estimated savings of 1.5 million per year in faculty salaries and student related expenses as expected. So that are our benefits. Further, an operating cost of 500,000 dollars per year will be needed to make this new grant project successful. So that's our that's a cost. In fact, that's our maintenance and operation cost, you would say. But also an estimated 200,000 per year will be removed from other funding initiatives. That's a disadvantage. The project of allocating grants was not meant to remove. Well, it's initial. It's what we say its main objective was not to remove those funds, but it's a negative consequence of it. OK, so we have benefits, disbenefits and costs. These are given here. Well, we have to make an annual worth of it. So we have our initial amount times the AP factor 6 percent 10. Then we have here 2 million. Now, then if we use the two definitions, if we use the conventional benefit cost ratio, we have a 0.51 outcome. If we use the modified benefit cost ratio in which we also put the maintenance and operation costs in the numerator, we have 0.39. Of course, we could also simply look at the sum and see whether benefit costs are larger than zero or not. And what we conclude from all three instances is that it's not a good project. OK, these are some real life examples. Regional traffic signal program. And you see that here it's evaluated with a benefit cost ratio, which seems to be tremendously high. So it's a very interesting project. Online you find all kinds of benefit costs compendia here for road weather management. So you can find quite a lot for free on the Internet. But that's just an example. We're not going further in that area. What if we don't have if we do not have one, but we have two alternatives? Well, then we have to do an incremental benefit cost analysis. Instead of reading through this procedure, it might be more interesting to have an example. Of course, you're expected to know how to what the procedure is, and you have to be capable of applying it. But instead of reading it, let's jump to the example. So here we are talking about the project to construct a new patient room wing to the municipal hospital. And there are two proposed designs labeled A and B, of which one needs to be chosen. So do nothing is not an alternative here. The design do not differ in some cost categories, but they do differ in the elements that are given in the table. Construction cost and building maintenance costs. It's clear what they mean. Patient usage cost is about the amount patients have to pay over the insurance coverage allowed for a hospital room. The discount rate is five percent and the life of the building and does the project horizon to be considered is 30 years. Then the first question is to use a conventional benefit cost ratio to select design A or B. So remember conventional means benefits minus these benefits over costs. So all costs. And then there's a second question that adds some complexity. A privately owned hospital in a nearby city lodged a complaint against design A because they fear a loss in income. Of five hundred thousand because they surgery patients will not come to them anymore, but go to the new hospital wing and design B also has some opponents. The merchants of the city are not happy because the hospital wing would eliminate the parking lot and they fear a loss of income of four hundred thousand from shoppers that will not be there anymore. So the question is, can you please redo the business? Sorry, the benefit cost analysis taking these benefits into account. OK, let's have a look. First thing that we have to do, of course, before we can proceed is we have to. We have to make sure that we have an annual word here, so we have to make sure that we have the right numbers here. I think by now you're very good already in computing annual words. Incremental, so we mean B minus A because B is the larger cost alternative. And here this is our benefits. So in for we have two hundred and fifty thousand minus three hundred and forty five thousand two hundred and fifty. So that means that if you're. Only considering costs and benefits, we will choose option A. Now, if you want to take into account also the this benefits, which was our second question. Then we see that we have to take into account the concerns about the concerns raised by the other hospital, by the commercial people. And then we see that we have. An incremental this benefit of minus one hundred thousand. So if you fill that out in our. In our formula, we have one point one. So that means that we will go for the more expensive alternative while here we were staying with. Lower cost one. Again, it illustrates the fact that. It's important to. To decide whether you put what point of view you will take, whether you will include these benefits or not. And it's also a nice illustration of how to do an incremental analysis. If you have multiple alternatives, well, we do pairwise. Benefit cost analysis. Well, pairwise incremental benefit cost analysis. It's not very different from what we did. In the rate of return chapter. So, OK, let's have a look at this example. So we have a project here, project of the Economic Development Corporation. Project of the Economic Development Corporation. Abbreviation EDC, which is a nonprofit corporation in Florida. The Intended Investment Project concerns a major recreational water park. A request for a proposal has been sent out and four proposals were received. One of those needs to be selected. The proposals differ in size and details of the water park attractions proposed. Interest rate to take into account is 7 percent and a study period of eight years is recommended. Some extra information. So there are guidelines that the entertainment industry can receive up to five hundred thousand as a first year incentive award and a 10 percent of that amount each year for eight years in property tax reduction. Each proposal includes a provision that residents of the city and even the county will benefit from reduced entrance fees. This fee reduction will be in effect as long as a property tax reduction incentive continues. EDC has estimated the total annual entrance fees with reduction for locals included and also they estimated the extra sales tax revenue expected for each proposal. The data can be found in the table and the question is please conduct an incremental benefit cost analysis to select the best alternative. So as we have seen before, this is the data and here we already have the computations. Let's have a look. The viewpoint of the citizen is taken. We have to make sure that we are comparing things that we can compare. We will first convert this into annual words. So for instance here we have 250,000 times AP factor 7 percent eight years plus 25,000 gives us 66,000 and for each of the proposals we are doing the same thing. They are ordered. Then we have to compare. So we compare the alternatives. We have to compute delta C. Delta C is 26,000, 93,000 minus 66,000. Then we have to compute the incremental benefits. So here the difference is 50,000. Here the difference is 10,000. So together they make 60,000. And then we have our benefit cost ratio of 2.24. So that means the increment is justified. So at this point we will select proposal 2. If we repeat the same thing, we see that if we compare 3 to 2, we see that we have a ratio of 0.62. So that means no, we are not going for proposal 3. So we still stick with proposal 2 as being the best. We repeat the calculations and here we see it's 1.3. So proposal 4 seems to be the best, but it's not really complying with the guidelines. It's saying that first 500,000 that was put forward, 800,000 is more. So we should reconsider. Either we are saying we are not going for 4 or we should reconsider that initial budget of 500,000 and raise it to 800,000. And here you have the full solution written out for you.