 In this chapter basics we are going to make a start with the course. We will cover some basic things without getting too technical but are really giving some flavor of what to expect in the remainder of the course. We are going to explore that concept of time value of money which is the basic concept in engineering economy. We are going to have a look at factors, how can we express these time and interest things that affect money and we are going to talk about nominal and effective interest rates. Why do we need that concept time value of money? We want to explore the monetary impact of investments that companies do. Obviously when a company and organization makes an investment they expect a return. In computing that return it is important to take into account the time value of money. We will do that through the use of the interest rate. What is an interest rate and return? I think this is a very easy step. You can either take the borrower's point of view or the lender's point of view. Look at the example in the grey square. Suppose that you borrow 10,000 dollars for one full year and you must pay back 10,700 dollars at the end of the year. That means that the difference is 700 dollars. You could say that it is what you as a borrower have to pay or you can say it is what the lender earns by me borrowing that money. If you look at 700 compared to 10,000 we have 7% per year. That is how we start. Why do we need that? We need that because we want another important concept in engineering economy. We want to have equivalent alternatives or equivalent in the money value of alternatives that we are computing. It is very difficult to compare alternatives. For instance, I can invest my money in project 1 and then I will have a return of 10,000 within 5 years. Or I can invest in project 2 and then in 4 years I will have 8,000 or in 6 years I will have 8,000. It is very difficult to compare. Basically what we will do is bring back all different alternatives to one point in time. Which can be now, which we will call later on the present word, or we can go for a moment in time in the future and then we will talk about the future word. An equivalent is then if you have $100 now, an interest rate of 6% per year, that means that you will have $106 one year from now. We already mentioned that interest is important in the time value of money. We have two types of interest. We have a simple interest and a compound interest. Simple interest for one period is the principal, so the amount you have times the interest rate, for instance, 1000 euros, interest rate of 10%, means that we have 100 euros interest. If you have more periods then you just have to multiply that amount by the number of periods. If you are talking about the compound interest, it is getting a little bit more complicated, then we have the principal plus all accrued interest times the interest rate. Suppose that I make a deposit of 10,000 euros in a savings account for 5 years and the interest rate is 5%. So how much interest do we earn in the scenario of single interest and the scenario of compound interest? If you look into the single interest case first, what does it mean? It means that every year I take up the amount of interest earned. So as you see, I start with 10,000 in year one, I earn 500 in year two, I still have 10,000, I earn again 500 and so on, 5 years long. So the total amount of interest that I earn is 5 times 500 is 2,500. In case of the compound interest, what I do is the interest that I earn I deposit in my account. So you see the first year similar to the same as in the single interest case, I have 10,000 in the bank, I earn 500 interest. But instead of taking up that interest, withdrawing that interest, I put it in my account. So that means that after two years I have 10,500 in my account. So the interest that I earn is then interest on my initial amount and interest on the interest of the previous year. So I have an interest of 525 and so on and so on. And after five years, you see I have a sum of 2,763, which is obviously higher than what I had in the single interest case. So this simple example shows that it's important to make a distinction between single and compound interest. The compound interest is one that is of importance for our engineering economy calculations. In terms of technology and symbols that we will use throughout the course, T represents time. P is a present sum of money at a time designated as T is zero now. F is a future amount of money at some point in time later than T is zero, for instance, five years from now. A is used for an uninterrupted series of equal end of period cash flows, annual cash flows, hence A. N is a number of interest periods, also called the study period or the horizon. And I is interest rate or the rate of return per time period, percent. So these are the symbols that we are going to use. They're pretty self-explaining. Computational help. We will illustrate that in some exercises that are coming up. So we can use the tables. There are tables that will help us with our computations and we can use Excel. In the course we will not use Excel, but of course you can freely use Excel to check the answers to any exercise that you might solve. The MAR, this is a very important concept, hence the red exclamation mark. MAR is the minimum attractive rate of return. We started by stating that companies that invest money, they expect some return on that money. Well, what do they expect? Well, they expect a return that is either equal or preferably higher than the minimum attractive rate of return that they had in mind. Therefore, that MAR is also called a hurdle rate. It's the hurdle that if you want an investment needs to take in order to be considered to be a south investment. The MAR is established by financial managers. Basically, it's based on the cost of capital and an allowance for risk. So it's always higher than the return for a safe investment. In chapter 10, we will go in detail on how companies determine their MAR. Well, we will not see actual computations, but we will see a whole bunch of factors that are influencing the MAR. It's a very important concept. This is a case study, as we saw in the exercises for the previous chapter. And here you see that we had expected returns on capital investment. And you see in past projects that varied 15%, 5%, 18%. So really it's something that the company is deciding on. It's not something you find on the Internet or you find on some, I don't know, in some books of engineer economy or you can ask your bank. It's really something the company decides for itself. Now types of financing. We said that the cost of capital is an important aspect of the MAR. Well, the cost of capital depends on how expensive is it for you to get together the money for that investment. Basically, you can file it into different sources, your own money, so to speak, or money from outside sources. So we're talking about equity financing and debt financing responsibility. This is something we will come back to later. Combination of debt and equity financing is, of course, possible. And it results in something called the WAC, a weighted average cost of capital. So the WAC is a basic element of the MAR. A very simple example. Suppose that you want to finance a music system with a credit card for 40% and the credit card is costing you 18% per year. And for the rest, 60%, you want to use a saving account earning a 5% per year. So that means that the WAC will be, well, 40% of 18 plus 60% of 5 will be a 12.2% per year. So important concept. Now inflation. I think you will know what inflation is. Inflation means that the purchasing power of your money is reduced. That also means that operating costs will increase and that your rate of return will be reduced. So definitely something we will need to take into account when we look at investments. Taxes. Well, unfortunately, it's something we all have to pay, we as individuals, but also companies. For the main part, we will do before tax cash flow analysis, which is basic. But then we also have two chapters that will address after tax analysis. Is it something you know? It's not you. If you do a replacement study, for instance, before taxes or after taxes, you will use exactly the same. Technique approach. But after tax, well, as a word said, you will have to include a tax analysis in your computations. And that can be a little bit complicated sometimes. Now, another important concept. Well, you see a lot of a lot of important concepts. That's why it's a basic chapter. Cash flows concept. Basic chapter. Cash flows are in fact what we need. Cash flows is about the money that is coming into our company and the money that is going out. Cash flow in, for instance, the revenue. Think about selling products, you get money in. Salvage value is what you still get on the market for an old machine. So suppose that you want to get rid of, I don't know, an old printer. If it's still worth something on the market, somebody will pay for you, they'll pay maybe 100 euros for it. So that's the salvage value. Cash outflow is money that you have to spend. That can be an initial purchasing cost. It can be salaries. It can be taxes. So that are cash outflows. In practical engineering economy problems, we're talking about investments that we will make today or in the future. So also the cash flows connected with these investments will be future cash flows. So we don't know them yet. What can we do about that? Well, we can either assume that we know them with certainty, like, well, I know that the annual operating cost will be 10,000 euros a year. We can take into account probabilities and say, well, probably the annual operating costs will be 10,000 euros a year, but there's a 20% chance that there will be 12,000 euros a year. We could take into account a range of possible realistic values, saying, well, annual operating costs will be somewhere between 9,000 and 11,000. Or we can assume that we know a distribution for our annual operating cost values. For instance, the annual operating costs will be taken from a triangle distribution, which A is 900, C is 10,000 and B is 13,000 a year. An assumption that we make is that all cash flows occur at the end of an interest period unless it's stated differently. That's an important assumption. We need an assumption like that. Otherwise, we will not be able to make clean calculations taking into account the time value of money. A tip with these cash flows is that visualizing them in a cash flow diagram will help our analysis. It will make things clear and it will avoid that we make mistakes. This is a cash flow diagram. You see it's pretty simple. We have an x-axis, which represents time, and we will have a y-axis, which represents the cash flows. A cash flow, which is negative, gets an arrow down. A cash flow, which is positive, gets an arrow up. So, 0, that's the moment in time that we are now, and then 1, 2, 3, etc. are the coming years. So, you see, year 1, we will have a cash flow in year 1 at the end of year 1. That's what we just said. Exercises we will postpone to the separate exercise session. You see here these exercises or multiple choice examples. Now, our notation. We are using the factor notation. It's an ANSI standard. And as you see, the general form is x slash y, i percent, n. X represents what is unknown, y represents what is known, i and n represent input parameters. They can be known or unknown, depending upon the problem, as you will see later in the course. So, an example, if P is 6 percent 20, is to be read as, well, that's the factor that we need to find F, given a P. I mean, the factor that we have to multiply with P in order to obtain F. When we know that the interest rate is 6 percent and the number of time periods to consider is 20. Now, how to compute these factors? Well, let's have a look at Fp and Pf. So, if you look at the cash flow diagram, we have an initial amount of P0. And we want to know the worth of it in years from now. So, the computation is pretty straightforward, as you see. If 1 is P plus ip, so that can be written as P times 1 plus i. The second year, after two years, I mean, we have P times 1 plus i, which is our amount, plus i times P plus 1 plus i, which is the interest. And that is written as P times 1 plus i square, etc. So, after in periods, we will have that F is P times 1 plus i to the power n, or the other way around, P is F divided by 1 plus i to the power n. So, this is the formula on which all the other formulas for factors are based. So, it's a very important one, and as you see, it's also a very simple one. Let's have a look at an example. So, we have an engineer. He received a bonus of 12,000 dollars, and he wants to invest it now and use the money after 24 years to make a down payment on a vacation home. He can count on a rate of return of 8% per year for each of the 24 years that he plans to leave the money in the bank. Now, what will be the amount that he can use for the down payment? Well, we can compute it in different ways. We can use the formula, so saying F is P times 1 plus i to the power n, and just make the calculation. We can use the factor notation, and the nice thing about these factors is that in the handbook we have tables. We have tables for each percentage and all the factors that you can dream of are there in the columns and in the rows we find the end. So, if we have a table for 8%, we look after 24 years, we're after the factor Fp, so we can dig it up there, and it's 6.3412. And another way that we can compute it is by putting the values in the FV formula in Excel and we obtain the same value. So, different ways of doing things. In the course we will always use the factor notation because it's very compact and it's easy to have an overview of the whole of computations when using these factor notations. Another example, how long will it take for $1000 to double if the interest rate is 5% per year? Well, here we don't know n, we have to look for n. We can say that $1000 is $2000 times that factor, so that factor should be 0.5, and then if we look in the table we see that somewhere between 14 and 15 years we will have that 5%. We can start interpolating and then we come up with 14.2 years. Other factors, P and Ap. We talked about A already, it's a uniform series factor, so we are talking about an uninterrupted series of equal payments or equal withdrawals. And there you see the factor Pa times 1 plus i to the power n minus 1, then everything divided by i times 1 plus i to the power n. Now how do we get to that formula? Well, I will just show it to you, these computations, to show that it's rather easy, it's really simple algebra. So we start with just writing out everything, so P is 8 times the factor for the A of 1 year plus 8 times basic formula, 2 years, etc. So again, that's very basic formula. And then we start manipulating it, we divide everything by 1 plus i, we subtract things. So very simple computations and then we end up with those factors. Of course if you have to make an exercise you can use that formula, but it's far more easy to look it up in tables. Let's have a look at this small example, so how much money should Be willing to pay for a guaranteed 600 per year for 9 years starting next year at a rate of return of 16%, a very simple cash flow diagram. So if we use the formula we just saw, we will say that P is 8 times 1 plus i to the power n minus 1 divided by i times 1 plus i to the power n. So we have our P immediately. We could do it year by year as you see in the table. We have the present words and we will use the factor for every year separately. We could also take a detour and say well I will first see what the future amount is of this cash flow series and then I will go back to the present word. Both are possible, both are correct, one is of course more efficient than the other. So here an example again with use of the tables. So the president of Formosa Plastics want to know the equivalent future worth of 1 million of capital investment each year for 8 years starting one year from now. And they earn at a rate of 14% per year. You see again the cash flow diagram. Either we use the formula, we make the computations or we use the factors and you see the table there. We have the table for 14%, we have to look at 8 years and we have to look for the factor FA. So we find it and it is rather simple to make computations. So another question, how much money must someone deposit every year from now at 5.5% in order to accumulate $6000 7 years from now. We don't have a table for 5.5% so we can either use the formula that you see there to the bottom left of the slide or we can take the table for 5% and 6% and make a simple interpolation. And then we end up with a factor of 0.12098 and we can multiply that with the 6,000 and we see that well there is an annual amount of 725.76 per year needed. Gradient factors. Sometimes cash flows are increasing or decreasing by a constant amount. Every year there will be an extra withdrawal or every year there will be an extra income and that extra will always be a constant amount. So that is what you see in the cash flow profile. So we have a base amount and we have a gradient. So we have a cash flow in year N is the base amount plus N minus 1 times G and G is that constant amount. And then you see the formula. Again, I just show it to you. We will not go through it. It's basic algebra. Here again you see that it's a pretty straightforward computation. And of course we can also compute the factor for the uniform series and for the future world. An example. So three counties in Florida have agreed to pool tax resources for bridge refurbishment. A recent meeting the county engineers estimated that a total of $500,000 will be deposited end of next year in an account for the repair of old and safety questionable bridges. And further they estimated the deposits will increase by 100,000 per year for only nine years thereafter and then cease. So what we want to know is the present world and the annual world. So this is a cash flow diagram. We have this 500,000 which we start and then we have the 100,000 that is coming on top of it every year. So here we see the computations. So we have here the base amount, so the 500,000 and then we have the gradient. So we have to split it up. So that's something you keep in mind. Sometimes if you just use the factors you're a little bit confused about what they mean. Think that it's just computing or just multiplying the starting amount or just multiplying the gradient amount. Well, be careful. You have a base amount and you have a gradient. So you have to split it up. Same thing can be done for the annual series. Of course the annual series, the 500, we don't have to multiply with anything because it's already an annual amount and then we just have the gradient amount that we have to multiply. Of course we could have made our life easy by once we have this amount by going directly to the annual amount by then using the AP factor. So that's also possible. Sometimes indeed cash flows increase or decrease every year but not by a constant amount but by a constant percentage. For instance, a typical example is maintenance costs that get a little bit more expensive every year. Again, we have our formula that you see. Again, the computations that are pretty straightforward. Let's take a look at this example. So we're talking about innovating existing water sports, right? Modification cost is $8,000 now. We expect that it can last for six years and after the six years we'll still get a salvage value of $1,300 meaning that we will be able to sell whatever is left of this modification for $1,300. Of course we have to take into account maintenance costs which is expected to be $1,700 the first year and increase by 11% per year. So this is again a negative cash flow as you see on the cash flow diagram as is of course the initial investment and the only positive cash flow is the salvage value. We also know the time period, the horizon, it's six years and we are given the 8% interest rate that we need to take into account. So we have everything, we have our interest rate, we have our horizon, we have our cash flow so we can do the computations. What do we have if we look at the formula? If we look at the formula, well we have our cash flow that we are after. We want to know the present world so that means at $8,000 we don't have to do anything about it because it's already the current time that is given. Here we have the $1,300 of our salvage value, this is a minus, this is a plus, $1,300 times the factor PF, 8% 6, PF we are after P we know F and then we have our gradient and we just here we use the gradient formula and that means finally we end up with an amount of minus $17,305.85. Of course, most real life cash flows do not fit exactly in the basic formula assumptions so we will have to make combinations. Here we have an example, so it's a purchase, it's about a purchase for CAD software, $5,000 now and annual payments of $500 for 6 years starting not next year but 3 years from now for annual upgrades. And if you consider the horizon of now, 3 years from now, 6 years we have 8 years in total, that's our horizon and the interest rate is 8%. Okay, so let's have a look. If we have this, we have this, so it's a simple annual flow, so we can use this formula. It's 500 times PA, we are after P, we know 8% 6 years, so we can compute that but then we have this amount. So this amount is still not what we are after, we want to know it now, so we have to take into account this time gap and this time gap we can take into account by multiplying what we just found by the PF 8% 2. And $5,000, well $5,000 is already current money I would say so it's okay. So and then if we bring together those three we end up with a total amount of $6,981. Let's have a look at a slightly more complex example. We know that we are talking about a 7% interest rate per year, we see a horizon of 12 years and we also see different cash flows. Cash flow diagram, let's see, a little bit of variation, this is summarized in the table below. So we have P1, an investment with a base amount of $2,000, gradient of $500, a period of 5 years, it starts in year 1, we have a withdrawal sequence of $5,000 with a gradient of $-1,000, again 5 years starting in year 1. And then we have a withdrawal sequence of $1,000, no gradient so twice the amount of $1,000 and periods is 2 years and we are talking about years 11 and 12. So I've tried to make an animated slide in order to make things a little bit more clear. Okay so we start with this series of cash flows. It's an investment sequence with a base amount of $2,000, a gradient of $500, it is 5 so we will need P1, we will need PG in order to have that amount P1. Now this withdrawal cash flow range, base amount $5,000, gradient of $-1,000, it is 5 so we will need PG in order to come to P2. Then we have our second withdrawal sequence which is $1,000 twice as we just said when we looked at the table. So we will need again PG and then P3. Okay now we will also need to, well not convert but to take into account that PW that we computed that it's not exactly already at moment 0 so we will have to use a factor in order to bring it to time 0. Let us now have a look at the formulas. So let's start with the P1 here which are the orange cash flows. So the present worth of deposits is 2,000 times PA 7% 5 years, pretty straight forward plus the 500 times the factor PG 7% 5 years so we are fine with that. Then we move to the first withdrawal sequence which is in the green ellipse. Okay so if you look here we have 5,000 times PA 7% 5 that's fine, minus 1,000 PG 7% 5 that's fine. But then we are only in year 5 and of course we need to go back to our current moment so time 0 so we still need to multiply by an extra factor PF 7% 5. In a similar way for the second withdrawal series we have 1,000 times PA 7% 2 but then we are only in year 10 so from year 10 we have to go to current moment time 0 so we have to multiply by PF 7% 10. Then if we add up our PW with our P1 we get our final answer which we are interested in. So note we work with these compact notations that's what I said earlier so we work with the factor notation the PA the PG the PF etc. So it's important that you know how to read and how to use these factor notations. Another way if you don't use the factor notations would be to use the long way so we could in fact make a long list of all the 12 years and show the cash or fill in the cash flows in the table and then use the factors PF and then add everything up and we would end up of course with the same result. But it's much more work. The last part of this basics chapter is about nominal and effective interest rates. The nominal interest rate R is an interest rate that does not include any consideration of compounding. And if you remember from the beginning of this chapter compounding we talk about compounding if we talk about interest rate on interest. Interest rate per period times the number of periods for instance 8% per year. So here you see some examples we can have of course we can talk about 1% or 1.5% per month. We can talk for six months etc. So it's a nominal interest rate. Effective interest rate IA is the actual rate that applies for a stated period of time. It accounts for the compounding of the interest during the time period of the corresponding nominal rate. And that's the one that really matters to properly account for the time value of money. And its notation is IA. A for actual. You see some examples like 4% per year compounded monthly and some other examples in the table. Now how do we go from one type of interest to the other? Well time period T is the period over which the interest is expressed. It's always stated 1% per month, 10% per year. The compounding period is the shortest time unit over which interest is charged or earned like 8% per year. Compounded monthly. Of course we can also talk about the compounding frequency which is the number of times M. That compounding occurs within a time period. For instance if you have 10% per year compounded monthly then M is 12. There you see the formula. An effective rate per compounding period I is R per time period T divided by the number of compounding periods M per T. So we have R over M. In the previous examples all the interest rates had T and CP being 1. So M was 1 so the interest rates were effective rates. Here you see some illustration. So 9% per year. Compounding period is quarter. So M is 4 and we get effective rates of 2.25. Effective annual interest rates. So let's look at that. Notation R is nominal interest rate. M is the number of compounding periods. I should say nominal interest rate per year. Number of compounding periods per year. I is the effective interest rate per compounding period. So we can express then an F in two ways. We can say F is P plus IAP. Or we can have a look at F as being P times 1 plus I to the power M. So if we combine those two we end up with a formula for IAP being 1 plus IAP. Let's briefly look at this example. So we have Shaki who obtained a new credit card from the national bank. With a stated rate of 18% per year compounded monthly. And there is a balance of 1000 dollars at the beginning of the year. And now we want to know what the effective annual rate is and how much she would owe to the bank after one year. We have the computation. Before we go to solving this question let's maybe draw your attention to the fact that it's important that they state that no payments have been made during the year. Otherwise we would have another situation as you will see in upcoming examples. So I will just go through the numbers and then we will go to the next slide. So they stated no payments have been made during the year. Otherwise we would have another situation as you will see in upcoming examples. So R is 18% per year. It's nominal interest rate. It's compounded monthly. It means that we have 12 compounding periods being M. And our effective interest rate I is then R divided by M is 18% divided by 12 is 1.5% per month. The effective annual interest rate is given by the formula we just derived. 1 plus I to the power M minus 1 and gives us 0.19562. The amount out after one year, well that's our good old formula. If it's P times 1 plus IA to the power 1 and that gives us an amount of 1,195.62 dollars. And here again you see an illustration of the effective annual interest rates. Now of course we could have a look at effective interest rates for any period of time. And then we are talking about the compounding periods and the payment periods that do not necessarily coincide. For instance a company deposits money each month into an account that pays a nominal interest rate of 14% per year. Compounded semi-annually. So that means that we have a CP of 6 and a payment period of 1. And then again we are going back to our formulas. Then we have the effective I which is 1 plus R over M to the power M minus 1. I think it's rather familiar to you by now. Here we have a table that is illustrating how the values differ if we change the nominal, semi-annual, quarterly, etc. The last column we will come back to continuously because that's a bit of a special case. So here we have an example. So Jenis is an engineer. She purchased stock for 6.90 per share and sold it one year later for 13.14. And now the question is, well, what did she earn? And can you express that in terms of annual rates and effective rates for quarterly compounding and for monthly compounding? Okay, we will not look at commission fees. So here again I wrote it down. So the effective annual rate of return in fact is IA that has a compounding period of one year. So then we have IA is the amount of increase per one year divided by the original price expressed in percentage. So we get 90.43% per year. Now the formulas that we need for the effective rate for quarterly compounding or monthly compounding are given there. Well, we know IA in this case. We are after I. So IA is 1 plus I to the power M minus 1, which means that I is given by IA plus 1 to the power 1 over M minus 1. So and then we end up with for the quarterly compounding with 17% and for the monthly compounding with 5%. So then there's a word of warning that, of course, in this case, you cannot just simple divide I by 4, for instance, to get the quarterly compounding interest. Another example. It's not it's nothing new. I mean, we have a company called Vistion and they received bits from potential suppliers and they want to compare them. And the thing is that it's a bit difficult to compare because they well, bit one is 9% per year compounded quarterly. Bit two is 3% per quarter compounded quarterly. Bit three is 8.8% per year compounded monthly. So it's a bit confusing to compare. So we would like to compare them in a way that we understand which is the best, which is the worst. So here we have the computations. But let's I again wrote it out a little bit more clear. So here you have a blow up of the cash flow diagrams with CP one quarter, PP six months for bit one and two and for bit three, we have a PP of six months, but we have a CP of one month. So basically, this is the same as in the copy of the handbook that was on previous slide. The reason I wrote it out is to show that, well, it's not difficult, but it's easy to make mistakes. So sometimes it pays off to take a long way here and to write like bit one is 9% per year compounded quarterly. PP is six months. R is 9% per year. That's 4.5% per six months and M is two quarters per six months. And then we fill out in the in the in the formula. Then we see that bit three seems to be the most interesting one. Same for effective annual rate. Take the time to write things out so that you don't make any mistakes. And again, bit three seems to be have the lowest annual rate. And we can start playing around further with these equivalence relations for PP and CP. Here you have what you have to do if PP is less than CP or PP is larger than CP. There's nothing new, so I leave it at you to explore further these things. We have you have the formulas, you have examples. It will come back in the workshop. So let's skip it for now. Now, I think you are quite capable of having a look at it on your own. Maybe let me just draw your attention to this special case, the continuous compounding. So we're talking about a business situation in which there are very large number of cash flows every day. So it's like we are doing continuous compounding. So if we start from the formula that we know by now that one plus R over M to the power M minus one is I. And we take the limit for M going to infinity. Of course, because we have a lot of say an infinite amount of compounding periods. We end up with the formula that I is equal to E to the power R minus one. And here again, you have an example of that. An interesting situation can occur when interest rates are not constant over time, but they vary over time. I think you already guess what you have to do then. You have to be careful and make sure that you don't make any mistakes. It's really not difficult, but it can be cumbersome task to perform. Maybe a simple example to illustrate to make sure that there are no misunderstandings here. I re-drew the cash flow diagram. So we have in year one, we have 70,000, sorry, in year two, we have 70,000. 25,000 in three and 25,000 in four. During the first two years, we have a 7% interest rate that we have to take into account. We want 9% in the third year and then 10% in the fourth year. What do we have if we want to compute the present worth? Well, we have the 7,000 times PA 7% 2. For the 35,000, we have the 35,000 times PF 9% 1. We go from year three to year two and then we have to multiply by PF 7% 2 to get from year two to year zero. Because we can't explicitly with just one factor because our interest rate is varying. Of course, for the 10% we have a similar thing. We have 25,000 times PF 10% 1 year times PF 9% 1 year times PF 7% 2 years. So again, it's definitely not difficult, but you have to be careful not to make any computational mistakes. Exercises again, we postpone to the exercise session or to the workshop. So wrap up. What did we learn in this chapter that is important? What is important is that we talked about the time value of money, which is an essential concept. We pointed out the importance of equivalence. So if you want to compare investment projects, we will always compare them as present words or as future words or as annual words. We do the interest of things like MAR and weighted average cost of capital. Very important. The suggestion was there. Please draw a clash fold diagram. It's just a tip. You don't have to do it, but it's avoiding mistakes. We talked about the factors. So how do we get from a future word, for instance, to a present word or from an annual word to a present word? We talked about gradient factors. We also expressed the importance of having this notation because it's helping us to have a very well, condensed mode of writing down our cash flows that we need to combine into a present word, for instance, or a future word. We also talked about interest rates and the fact that nominal rates and effective rates are quite different. These factors, to come back to these factors, where do we find them? Well, either we use the formulas, we can find them in tables or we can use an Excel built-in function. The latter is something we will not do in this course.